---
cena_id: 01_organon/04_analiticos_posteriores/L01-C22_cena01
obra_pt: "Analíticos Posteriores"
obra_en: "Posterior Analytics"
categoria: 01_organon
obra_slug: 04_analiticos_posteriores
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Mure
livro_num: 1
livro_marker: "BOOK I"
capitulo_num: 22
capitulo_marker: "Part 22"
sub_cena_num: 1
sub_cena_total: 1
audio_in_obra_idx: 22
audio_in_obra_total: 53
chars: 10412
---

In the case of predicates constituting the essential nature of a thing,
it clearly terminates, seeing that if definition is possible, or in
other words, if essential form is knowable, and an infinite series
cannot be traversed, predicates constituting a thing's essential nature
must be finite in number. But as regards predicates generally we have
the following prefatory remarks to make. (1) We can affirm without
falsehood 'the white (thing) is walking', and that big (thing) is
a log'; or again, 'the log is big', and 'the man walks'. But the affirmation
differs in the two cases. When I affirm 'the white is a log', I mean
that something which happens to be white is a log-not that white is
the substratum in which log inheres, for it was not qua white or qua
a species of white that the white (thing) came to be a log, and the
white (thing) is consequently not a log except incidentally. On the
other hand, when I affirm 'the log is white', I do not mean that something
else, which happens also to be a log, is white (as I should if I said
'the musician is white,' which would mean 'the man who happens also
to be a musician is white'); on the contrary, log is here the substratum-the
substratum which actually came to be white, and did so qua wood or
qua a species of wood and qua nothing else. 

If we must lay down a rule, let us entitle the latter kind of statement
predication, and the former not predication at all, or not strict
but accidental predication. 'White' and 'log' will thus serve as types
respectively of predicate and subject. 

We shall assume, then, that the predicate is invariably predicated
strictly and not accidentally of the subject, for on such predication
demonstrations depend for their force. It follows from this that when
a single attribute is predicated of a single subject, the predicate
must affirm of the subject either some element constituting its essential
nature, or that it is in some way qualified, quantified, essentially
related, active, passive, placed, or dated. 

(2) Predicates which signify substance signify that the subject is
identical with the predicate or with a species of the predicate. Predicates
not signifying substance which are predicated of a subject not identical
with themselves or with a species of themselves are accidental or
coincidental; e.g. white is a coincident of man, seeing that man is
not identical with white or a species of white, but rather with animal,
since man is identical with a species of animal. These predicates
which do not signify substance must be predicates of some other subject,
and nothing can be white which is not also other than white. The Forms
we can dispense with, for they are mere sound without sense; and even
if there are such things, they are not relevant to our discussion,
since demonstrations are concerned with predicates such as we have
defined. 

(3) If A is a quality of B, B cannot be a quality of A-a quality of
a quality. Therefore A and B cannot be predicated reciprocally of
one another in strict predication: they can be affirmed without falsehood
of one another, but not genuinely predicated of each other. For one
alternative is that they should be substantially predicated of one
another, i.e. B would become the genus or differentia of A-the predicate
now become subject. But it has been shown that in these substantial
predications neither the ascending predicates nor the descending subjects
form an infinite series; e.g. neither the series, man is biped, biped
is animal, &c., nor the series predicating animal of man, man of Callias,
Callias of a further. subject as an element of its essential nature,
is infinite. For all such substance is definable, and an infinite
series cannot be traversed in thought: consequently neither the ascent
nor the descent is infinite, since a substance whose predicates were
infinite would not be definable. Hence they will not be predicated
each as the genus of the other; for this would equate a genus with
one of its own species. Nor (the other alternative) can a quale be
reciprocally predicated of a quale, nor any term belonging to an adjectival
category of another such term, except by accidental predication; for
all such predicates are coincidents and are predicated of substances.
On the other hand-in proof of the impossibility of an infinite ascending
series-every predication displays the subject as somehow qualified
or quantified or as characterized under one of the other adjectival
categories, or else is an element in its substantial nature: these
latter are limited in number, and the number of the widest kinds under
which predications fall is also limited, for every predication must
exhibit its subject as somehow qualified, quantified, essentially
related, acting or suffering, or in some place or at some time.

I assume first that predication implies a single subject and a single
attribute, and secondly that predicates which are not substantial
are not predicated of one another. We assume this because such predicates
are all coincidents, and though some are essential coincidents, others
of a different type, yet we maintain that all of them alike are predicated
of some substratum and that a coincident is never a substratum-since
we do not class as a coincident anything which does not owe its designation
to its being something other than itself, but always hold that any
coincident is predicated of some substratum other than itself, and
that another group of coincidents may have a different substratum.
Subject to these assumptions then, neither the ascending nor the descending
series of predication in which a single attribute is predicated of
a single subject is infinite. For the subjects of which coincidents
are predicated are as many as the constitutive elements of each individual
substance, and these we have seen are not infinite in number, while
in the ascending series are contained those constitutive elements
with their coincidents-both of which are finite. We conclude that
there is a given subject (D) of which some attribute (C) is primarily
predicable; that there must be an attribute (B) primarily predicable
of the first attribute, and that the series must end with a term (A)
not predicable of any term prior to the last subject of which it was
predicated (B), and of which no term prior to it is predicable.

The argument we have given is one of the so-called proofs; an alternative
proof follows. Predicates so related to their subjects that there
are other predicates prior to them predicable of those subjects are
demonstrable; but of demonstrable propositions one cannot have something
better than knowledge, nor can one know them without demonstration.
Secondly, if a consequent is only known through an antecedent (viz.
premisses prior to it) and we neither know this antecedent nor have
something better than knowledge of it, then we shall not have scientific
knowledge of the consequent. Therefore, if it is possible through
demonstration to know anything without qualification and not merely
as dependent on the acceptance of certain premisses-i.e. hypothetically-the
series of intermediate predications must terminate. If it does not
terminate, and beyond any predicate taken as higher than another there
remains another still higher, then every predicate is demonstrable.
Consequently, since these demonstrable predicates are infinite in
number and therefore cannot be traversed, we shall not know them by
demonstration. If, therefore, we have not something better than knowledge
of them, we cannot through demonstration have unqualified but only
hypothetical science of anything. 

As dialectical proofs of our contention these may carry conviction,
but an analytic process will show more briefly that neither the ascent
nor the descent of predication can be infinite in the demonstrative
sciences which are the object of our investigation. Demonstration
proves the inherence of essential attributes in things. Now attributes
may be essential for two reasons: either because they are elements
in the essential nature of their subjects, or because their subjects
are elements in their essential nature. An example of the latter is
odd as an attribute of number-though it is number's attribute, yet
number itself is an element in the definition of odd; of the former,
multiplicity or the indivisible, which are elements in the definition
of number. In neither kind of attribution can the terms be infinite.
They are not infinite where each is related to the term below it as
odd is to number, for this would mean the inherence in odd of another
attribute of odd in whose nature odd was an essential element: but
then number will be an ultimate subject of the whole infinite chain
of attributes, and be an element in the definition of each of them.
Hence, since an infinity of attributes such as contain their subject
in their definition cannot inhere in a single thing, the ascending
series is equally finite. Note, moreover, that all such attributes
must so inhere in the ultimate subject-e.g. its attributes in number
and number in them-as to be commensurate with the subject and not
of wider extent. Attributes which are essential elements in the nature
of their subjects are equally finite: otherwise definition would be
impossible. Hence, if all the attributes predicated are essential
and these cannot be infinite, the ascending series will terminate,
and consequently the descending series too. 

If this is so, it follows that the intermediates between any two terms
are also always limited in number. An immediately obvious consequence
of this is that demonstrations necessarily involve basic truths, and
that the contention of some-referred to at the outset-that all truths
are demonstrable is mistaken. For if there are basic truths, (a) not
all truths are demonstrable, and (b) an infinite regress is impossible;
since if either (a) or (b) were not a fact, it would mean that no
interval was immediate and indivisible, but that all intervals were
divisible. This is true because a conclusion is demonstrated by the
interposition, not the apposition, of a fresh term. If such interposition
could continue to infinity there might be an infinite number of terms
between any two terms; but this is impossible if both the ascending
and descending series of predication terminate; and of this fact,
which before was shown dialectically, analytic proof has now been
given.
