---
cena_id: 01_organon/05_topicos/L04-C04_cena01
obra_pt: "Tópicos"
obra_en: "Topics"
categoria: 01_organon
obra_slug: 05_topicos
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Pickard-Cambridge
livro_num: 4
livro_marker: "BOOK IV"
capitulo_num: 4
capitulo_marker: "Part 4"
sub_cena_num: 1
sub_cena_total: 1
audio_in_obra_idx: 39
audio_in_obra_total: 83
chars: 9763
---

Again, consider the case of things that bear a like relation to one
another. Thus (e.g.) the relation of the pleasant to pleasure is like
that of the useful to the good: for in each case the one produces
the other. If therefore pleasure be a kind of 'good', then also the
pleasant will be a kind of 'useful': for clearly it may be taken to
be productive of good, seeing that pleasure is good. In the same way
also consider the case of processes of generation and destruction;
if (e.g.) to build be to be active, then to have built is to have
been active, and if to learn be to recollect, then also to have learnt
is to have recollected, and if to be decomposed be to be destroyed,
then to have been decomposed is to have been destroyed, and decomposition
is a kind of destruction. Consider also in the same way the case of
things that generate or destroy, and of the capacities and uses of
things; and in general, both in demolishing and in establishing an
argument, you should examine things in the light of any resemblance
of whatever description, as we were saying in the case of generation
and destruction. For if what tends to destroy tends to decompose,
then also to be destroyed is to be decomposed: and if what tends to
generate tends to produce, then to be generated is to be produced,
and generation is production. Likewise, also, in the case of the capacities
and uses of things: for if a capacity be a disposition, then also
to be capable of something is to be disposed to it, and if the use
of anything be an activity, then to use it is to be active, and to
have used it is to have been active. 

If the opposite of the species be a privation, there are two ways
of demolishing an argument, first of all by looking to see if the
opposite be found in the genus rendered: for either the privation
is to be found absolutely nowhere in the same genus, or at least not
in the same ultimate genus: e.g. if the ultimate genus containing
sight be sensation, then blindness will not be a sensation. Secondly,
if there be a sensation. Secondly, if there be a privation opposed
to both genus and species, but the opposite of the species be not
found in the opposite of the genus, then neither could the species
rendered be in the genus rendered. If, then, you are demolishing a
view, you should follow the rule as stated; but if establishing one
there is but one way: for if the opposite species be found in the
opposite genus, then also the species in question would be found in
the genus in question: e.g. if 'blindness' be a form of 'insensibility',
then 'sight' is a form of 'sensation'. 

Again, look at the negations of the genus and species and convert
the order of terms, according to the method described in the case
of Accident: e.g. if the pleasant be a kind of good, what is not good
is not pleasant. For were this no something not good as well would
then be pleasant. That, however, cannot be, for it is impossible,
if 'good' be the genus of pleasant, that anything not good should
be pleasant: for of things of which the genus is not predicated, none
of the species is predicated either. Also, in establishing a view,
you should adopt the same method of examination: for if what is not
good be not pleasant, then what is pleasant is good, so that 'good'
is the genus of 'pleasant'. 

If the species be a relative term, see whether the genus be a relative
term as well: for if the species be a relative term, so too is the
genus, as is the case with 'double' and 'multiple': for each is a
relative term. If, on the other hand, the genus be a relative term,
there is no necessity that the species should be so as well: for 'knowledge'is
a relative term, but not so 'grammar'. Or possibly not even the first
statement would be generally considered true: for virtue is a kind
of 'noble' and a kind of 'good' thing, and yet, while 'virtue' is
a relative term, 'good' and 'noble' are not relatives but qualities.
Again, see whether the species fails to be used in the same relation
when called by its own name, and when called by the name of its genus:
e.g. if the term 'double' be used to mean the double of a 'half',
then also the term 'multiple' ought to be used to mean multiple of
a 'half'. Otherwise 'multiple' could not be the genus of 'double'.

Moreover, see whether the term fail to be used in the same relation
both when called by the name of its genus, and also when called by
those of all the genera of its genus. For if the double be a multiple
of a half, then 'in excess of 'will also be used in relation to a
'half': and, in general, the double will be called by the names of
all the higher genera in relation to a 'half'. An objection may be
raised that there is no necessity for a term to be used in the same
relation when called by its own name and when called by that of its
genus: for 'knowledge' is called knowledge 'of an object', whereas
it is called a 'state' and 'disposition' not of an 'object' but of
the 'soul'. 

Again, see whether the genus and the species be used in the same way
in respect of the inflexions they take, e.g. datives and genitives
and all the rest. For as the species is used, so should the genus
be as well, as in the case of 'double' and its higher genera: for
we say both 'double of' and 'multiple of' a thing. Likewise, also,
in the case of 'knowledge': for both knowledge' itself and its genera,
e.g. 'disposition' and 'state', are said to be 'of' something. An
objection may be raised that in some cases it is not so: for we say
'superior to' and 'contrary to' so and so, whereas 'other', which
is the genus of these terms, demands not 'to' but 'than': for the
expression is 'other than' so and so. 

Again, see whether terms used in like case relationships fail to yield
a like construction when converted, as do 'double' and 'multiple'.
For each of these terms takes a genitive both in itself and in its
converted form: for we say both a half of' and 'a fraction of' something.
The case is the same also as regards both 'knowledge' and 'conception':
for these take a genitive, and by conversion an 'object of knowledge'
and an 'object of conception' are both alike used with a dative. If,
then, in any cases the constructions after conversion be not alike,
clearly the one term is not the genus of the other. 

Again, see whether the species and the genus fail to be used in relation
to an equal number of things: for the general view is that the uses
of both are alike and equal in number, as is the case with 'present'
and 'grant'. For a present' is of something or to some one, and also
a 'grant' is of something and to some one: and 'grant' is the genus
of 'present', for a 'present' is a 'grant that need not be returned'.
In some cases, however, the number of relations in which the terms
are used happens not to be equal, for while 'double' is double of
something, we speak of 'in excess' or 'greater' in something, as well
as of or than something: for what is in excess or greater is always
in excess in something, as well as in excess of something. Hence the
terms in question are not the genera of 'double', inasmuch as they
are not used in relation to an equal number of things with the species.
Or possibly it is not universally true that species and genus are
used in relation to an equal number of things. 

See, also, if the opposite of the species have the opposite of the
genus as its genus, e.g. whether, if 'multiple' be the genus of 'double',
'fraction' be also the genus of 'half'. For the opposite of the genus
should always be the genus of the opposite species. If, then, any
one were to assert that knowledge is a kind of sensation, then also
the object of knowledge will have to be a kind of object of sensation,
whereas it is not: for an object of knowledge is not always an object
of sensation: for objects of knowledge include some of the objects
of intuition as well. Hence 'object of sensation' is not the genus
of 'object of knowledge': and if this be so, neither is 'sensation'
the genus of 'knowledge'. 

Seeing that of relative terms some are of necessity found in, or used
of, the things in relation to which they happen at any time to be
used (e.g. 'disposition' and 'state' and 'balance'; for in nothing
else can the aforesaid terms possibly be found except in the things
in relation to which they are used), while others need not be found
in the things in relation to which they are used at any time, though
they still may be (e.g. if the term 'object of knowledge' be applied
to the soul: for it is quite possible that the knowledge of itself
should be possessed by the soul itself, but it is not necessary, for
it is possible for this same knowledge to be found in some one else),
while for others, again, it is absolutely impossible that they should
be found in the things in relation to which they happen at any time
to be used (as e.g. that the contrary should be found in the contrary
or knowledge in the object of knowledge, unless the object of knowledge
happen to be a soul or a man)-you should look, therefore, and see
whether he places a term of one kind inside a genus that is not of
that kind, e.g. suppose he has said that 'memory' is the 'abiding
of knowledge'. For 'abiding' is always found in that which abides,
and is used of that, so that the abiding of knowledge also will be
found in knowledge. Memory, then, is found in knowledge, seeing that
it is the abiding of knowledge. But this is impossible, for memory
is always found in the soul. The aforesaid commonplace rule is common
to the subject of Accident as well: for it is all the same to say
that 'abiding' is the genus of memory, or to allege that it is an
accident of it. For if in any way whatever memory be the abiding of
knowledge, the same argument in regard to it will apply.
