---
cena_id: 01_organon/05_topicos/L06-C06_cena01
obra_pt: "Tópicos"
obra_en: "Topics"
categoria: 01_organon
obra_slug: 05_topicos
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Pickard-Cambridge
livro_num: 6
livro_marker: "BOOK VI"
capitulo_num: 6
capitulo_marker: "Part 6"
sub_cena_num: 1
sub_cena_total: 2
audio_in_obra_idx: 55
audio_in_obra_total: 83
chars: 6607
---

Again, in regard to the differentiae, we must examine in like manner
whether the differentiae, too, that he has stated be those of the
genus. For if a man has not defined the object by the differentiae
peculiar to it, or has mentioned something such as is utterly incapable
of being a differentia of anything, e.g. 'animal' or 'substance',
clearly he has not defined it at all: for the aforesaid terms do not
differentiate anything at all. Further, we must see whether the differentia
stated possesses anything that is co-ordinate with it in a division;
for, if not, clearly the one stated could not be a differentia of
the genus. For a genus is always divided by differentiae that are
co-ordinate members of a division, as, for instance, by the terms
'walking', 'flying', 'aquatic', and 'biped'. Or see if, though the
contrasted differentia exists, it yet is not true of the genus, for
then, clearly, neither of them could be a differentia of the genus;
for differentiae that are co-ordinates in a division with the differentia
of a thing are all true of the genus to which the thing belongs. Likewise,
also, see if, though it be true, yet the addition of it to the genus
fails to make a species. For then, clearly, this could not be a specific
differentia of the genus: for a specific differentia, if added to
the genus, always makes a species. If, however, this be no true differentia,
no more is the one adduced, seeing that it is a co-ordinate member
of a division with this. 

Moreover, see if he divides the genus by a negation, as those do who
define line as 'length without breadth': for this means simply that
it has not any breadth. The genus will then be found to partake of
its own species: for, since of everything either an affirmation or
its negation is true, length must always either lack breadth or possess
it, so that 'length' as well, i.e. the genus of 'line', will be either
with or without breadth. But 'length without breadth' is the definition
of a species, as also is 'length with breadth': for 'without breadth'
and 'with breadth' are differentiae, and the genus and differentia
constitute the definition of the species. Hence the genus would admit
of the definition of its species. Likewise, also, it will admit of
the definition of the differentia, seeing that one or the other of
the aforesaid differentiae is of necessity predicated of the genus.
The usefulness of this principle is found in meeting those who assert
the existence of 'Ideas': for if absolute length exist, how will it
be predicable of the genus that it has breadth or that it lacks it?
For one assertion or the other will have to be true of 'length' universally,
if it is to be true of the genus at all: and this is contrary to the
fact: for there exist both lengths which have, and lengths which have
not, breadth. Hence the only people against whom the rule can be employed
are those who assert that a genus is always numerically one; and this
is what is done by those who assert the real existence of the 'Ideas';
for they allege that absolute length and absolute animal are the genus.

It may be that in some cases the definer is obliged to employ a negation
as well, e.g. in defining privations. For 'blind' means a thing which
cannot see when its nature is to see. There is no difference between
dividing the genus by a negation, and dividing it by such an affirmation
as is bound to have a negation as its co-ordinate in a division, e.g.
supposing he had defined something as 'length possessed of breadth';
for co-ordinate in the division with that which is possessed of breadth
is that which possesses no breadth and that only, so that again the
genus is divided by a negation. 

Again, see if he rendered the species as a differentia, as do those
who define 'contumely' as 'insolence accompanied by jeering'; for
jeering is a kind of insolence, i.e. it is a species and not a differentia.

Moreover, see if he has stated the genus as the differentia, e.g.
'Virtue is a good or noble state: for 'good' is the genus of 'virtue'.
Or possibly 'good' here is not the genus but the differentia, on the
principle that the same thing cannot be in two genera of which neither
contains the other: for 'good' does not include 'state', nor vice
versa: for not every state is good nor every good a 'state'. Both,
then, could not be genera, and consequently, if 'state' is the genus
of virtue, clearly 'good' cannot be its genus: it must rather be the
differentia'. Moreover, 'a state' indicates the essence of virtue,
whereas 'good' indicates not the essence but a quality: and to indicate
a quality is generally held to be the function of the differentia.
See, further, whether the differentia rendered indicates an individual
rather than a quality: for the general view is that the differentia
always expresses a quality. 

Look and see, further, whether the differentia belongs only by accident
to the object defined. For the differentia is never an accidental
attribute, any more than the genus is: for the differentia of a thing
cannot both belong and not belong to it. 

Moreover, if either the differentia or the species, or any of the
things which are under the species, is predicable of the genus, then
he could not have defined the term. For none of the aforesaid can
possibly be predicated of the genus, seeing that the genus is the
term with the widest range of all. Again, see if the genus be predicated
of the differentia; for the general view is that the genus is predicated,
not of the differentia, but of the objects of which the differentia
is predicated. Animal (e.g.) is predicated of 'man' or 'ox' or other
walking animals, not of the actual differentia itself which we predicate
of the species. For if 'animal' is to be predicated of each of its
differentiae, then 'animal' would be predicated of the species several
times over; for the differentiae are predicates of the species. Moreover,
the differentiae will be all either species or individuals, if they
are animals; for every animal is either a species or an individual.

Likewise you must inquire also if the species or any of the objects
that come under it is predicated of the differentia: for this is impossible,
seeing that the differentia is a term with a wider range than the
various species. Moreover, if any of the species be predicated of
it, the result will be that the differentia is a species: if, for
instance, 'man' be predicated, the differentia is clearly the human
race. Again, see if the differentia fails to be prior to the species:
for the differentia ought to be posterior to the genus, but prior
to the species.
