---
cena_id: 01_organon/05_topicos/L07-C05_cena01
obra_pt: "Tópicos"
obra_en: "Topics"
categoria: 01_organon
obra_slug: 05_topicos
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Pickard-Cambridge
livro_num: 7
livro_marker: "BOOK VII"
capitulo_num: 5
capitulo_marker: "Part 5"
sub_cena_num: 1
sub_cena_total: 1
audio_in_obra_idx: 69
audio_in_obra_total: 83
chars: 7529
---

That it is more difficult to establish than to overthrow a definition,
is obvious from considerations presently to be urged. For to see for
oneself, and to secure from those whom one is questioning, an admission
of premisses of this sort is no simple matter, e.g. that of the elements
of the definition rendered the one is genus and the other differentia,
and that only the genus and differentiae are predicated in the category
of essence. Yet without these premisses it is impossible to reason
to a definition; for if any other things as well are predicated of
the thing in the category of essence, there is no telling whether
the formula stated or some other one is its definition, for a definition
is an expression indicating the essence of a thing. The point is clear
also from the following: It is easier to draw one conclusion than
many. Now in demolishing a definition it is sufficient to argue against
one point only (for if we have overthrown any single point whatsoever,
we shall have demolished the definition); whereas in establishing
a definition, one is bound to bring people to the view that everything
contained in the definition is attributable. Moreover, in establishing
a case, the reasoning brought forward must be universal: for the definition
put forward must be predicated of everything of which the term is
predicated, and must moreover be convertible, if the definition rendered
is to be peculiar to the subject. In overthrowing a view, on the other
hand, there is no longer any necessity to show one's point universally:
for it is enough to show that the formula is untrue of any one of
the things embraced under the term. 

Further, even supposing it should be necessary to overthrow something
by a universal proposition, not even so is there any need to prove
the converse of the proposition in the process of overthrowing the
definition. For merely to show that the definition fails to be predicated
of every one of the things of which the term is predicated, is enough
to overthrow it universally: and there is no need to prove the converse
of this in order to show that the term is predicated of things of
which the expression is not predicated. Moreover, even if it applies
to everything embraced under the term, but not to it alone, the definition
is thereby demolished. 

The case stands likewise in regard to the property and genus of a
term also. For in both cases it is easier to overthrow than to establish.
As regards the property this is clear from what has been said: for
as a rule the property is rendered in a complex phrase, so that to
overthrow it, it is only necessary to demolish one of the terms used,
whereas to establish it is necessary to reason to them all. Then,
too, nearly all the other rules that apply to the definition will
apply also to the property of a thing. For in establishing a property
one has to show that it is true of everything included under the term
in question, whereas to overthrow one it is enough to show in a single
case only that it fails to belong: further, even if it belongs to
everything falling under the term, but not to that only, it is overthrown
in this case as well, as was explained in the case of the definition.
In regard to the genus, it is clear that you are bound to establish
it in one way only, viz. by showing that it belongs in every case,
while of overthrowing it there are two ways: for if it has been shown
that it belongs either never or not in a certain case, the original
statement has been demolished. Moreover, in establishing a genus it
is not enough to show that it belongs, but also that it belongs as
genus has to be shown; whereas in overthrowing it, it is enough to
show its failure to belong either in some particular case or in every
case. It appears, in fact, as though, just as in other things to destroy
is easier than to create, so in these matters too to overthrow is
easier than to establish. 

In the case of an accidental attribute the universal proposition is
easier to overthrow than to establish; for to establish it, one has
to show that it belongs in every case, whereas to overthrow it, it
is enough to show that it does not belong in one single case. The
particular proposition is, on the contrary, easier to establish than
to overthrow: for to establish it, it is enough to show that it belongs
in a particular instance, whereas to overthrow it, it has to be shown
that it never belongs at all. 

It is clear also that the easiest thing of all is to overthrow a definition.
For on account of the number of statements involved we are presented
in the definition with the greatest number of points for attack, and
the more plentiful the material, the quicker an argument comes: for
there is more likelihood of a mistake occurring in a large than in
a small number of things. Moreover, the other rules too may be used
as means for attacking a definition: for if either the formula be
not peculiar, or the genus rendered be the wrong one, or something
included in the formula fail to belong, the definition is thereby
demolished. On the other hand, against the others we cannot bring
all of the arguments drawn from definitions, nor yet of the rest:
for only those relating to accidental attributes apply generally to
all the aforesaid kinds of attribute. For while each of the aforesaid
kinds of attribute must belong to the thing in question, yet the genus
may very well not belong as a property without as yet being thereby
demolished. Likewise also the property need not belong as a genus,
nor the accident as a genus or property, so long as they do belong.
So that it is impossible to use one set as a basis of attack upon
the other except in the case of definition. Clearly, then, it is the
easiest of all things to demolish a definition, while to establish
one is the hardest. For there one both has to establish all those
other points by reasoning (i.e. that the attributes stated belong,
and that the genus rendered is the true genus, and that the formula
is peculiar to the term), and moreover, besides this, that the formula
indicates the essence of the thing; and this has to be done correctly.

Of the rest, the property is most nearly of this kind: for it is easier
to demolish, because as a rule it contains several terms; while it
is the hardest to establish, both because of the number of things
that people must be brought to accept, and, besides this, because
it belongs to its subject alone and is predicated convertibly with
its subject. 

The easiest thing of all to establish is an accidental predicate:
for in other cases one has to show not only that the predicate belongs,
but also that it belongs in such and such a particular way: whereas
in the case of the accident it is enough to show merely that it belongs.
On the other hand, an accidental predicate is the hardest thing to
overthrow, because it affords the least material: for in stating accident
a man does not add how the predicate belongs; and accordingly, while
in other cases it is possible to demolish what is said in two ways,
by showing either that the predicate does not belong, or that it does
not belong in the particular way stated, in the case of an accidental
predicate the only way to demolish it is to show that it does not
belong at all. 

The commonplace arguments through which we shall be well supplied
with lines of argument with regard to our several problems have now
been enumerated at about sufficient length. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK VIII
