---
cena_id: 03_psicologia_biologia/01_de_anima/L01-C05_cena01
obra_pt: "Sobre a Alma (De Anima)"
obra_en: "On the Soul"
categoria: 03_psicologia_biologia
obra_slug: 01_de_anima
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Smith
livro_num: 1
livro_marker: "BOOK I"
capitulo_num: 5
capitulo_marker: "Part 5"
sub_cena_num: 1
sub_cena_total: 2
audio_in_obra_idx: 5
audio_in_obra_total: 31
chars: 7792
---

The result is, as we have said, that this view, while on the one side
identical with that of those who maintain that soul is a subtle kind
of body, is on the other entangled in the absurdity peculiar to Democritus'
way of describing the manner in which movement is originated by soul.
For if the soul is present throughout the whole percipient body, there
must, if the soul be a kind of body, be two bodies in the same place;
and for those who call it a number, there must be many points at one
point, or every body must have a soul, unless the soul be a different
sort of number-other, that is, than the sum of the points existing
in a body. Another consequence that follows is that the animal must
be moved by its number precisely in the way that Democritus explained
its being moved by his spherical psychic atoms. What difference does
it make whether we speak of small spheres or of large units, or, quite
simply, of units in movement? One way or another, the movements of
the animal must be due to their movements. Hence those who combine
movement and number in the same subject lay themselves open to these
and many other similar absurdities. It is impossible not only that
these characters should give the definition of soul-it is impossible
that they should even be attributes of it. The point is clear if the
attempt be made to start from this as the account of soul and explain
from it the affections and actions of the soul, e.g. reasoning, sensation,
pleasure, pain, &c. For, to repeat what we have said earlier, movement
and number do not facilitate even conjecture about the derivative
properties of soul. 

Such are the three ways in which soul has traditionally been defined;
one group of thinkers declared it to be that which is most originative
of movement because it moves itself, another group to be the subtlest
and most nearly incorporeal of all kinds of body. We have now sufficiently
set forth the difficulties and inconsistencies to which these theories
are exposed. It remains now to examine the doctrine that soul is composed
of the elements. 

The reason assigned for this doctrine is that thus the soul may perceive
or come to know everything that is, but the theory necessarily involves
itself in many impossibilities. Its upholders assume that like is
known only by like, and imagine that by declaring the soul to be composed
of the elements they succeed in identifying the soul with all the
things it is capable of apprehending. But the elements are not the
only things it knows; there are many others, or, more exactly, an
infinite number of others, formed out of the elements. Let us admit
that the soul knows or perceives the elements out of which each of
these composites is made up; but by what means will it know or perceive
the composite whole, e.g. what God, man, flesh, bone (or any other
compound) is? For each is, not merely the elements of which it is
composed, but those elements combined in a determinate mode or ratio,
as Empedocles himself says of bone, 

The kindly Earth in its broad-bosomed moulds 

Won of clear Water two parts out of eight, And four of Fire; and so
white bones were formed. 

Nothing, therefore, will be gained by the presence of the elements
in the soul, unless there be also present there the various formulae
of proportion and the various compositions in accordance with them.
Each element will indeed know its fellow outside, but there will be
no knowledge of bone or man, unless they too are present in the constitution
of the soul. The impossibility of this needs no pointing out; for
who would suggest that stone or man could enter into the constitution
of the soul? The same applies to 'the good' and 'the not-good', and
so on. 

Further, the word 'is' has many meanings: it may be used of a 'this'
or substance, or of a quantum, or of a quale, or of any other of the
kinds of predicates we have distinguished. Does the soul consist of
all of these or not? It does not appear that all have common elements.
Is the soul formed out of those elements alone which enter into substances?
so how will it be able to know each of the other kinds of thing? Will
it be said that each kind of thing has elements or principles of its
own, and that the soul is formed out of the whole of these? In that
case, the soul must be a quantum and a quale and a substance. But
all that can be made out of the elements of a quantum is a quantum,
not a substance. These (and others like them) are the consequences
of the view that the soul is composed of all the elements.

It is absurd, also, to say both (a) that like is not capable of being
affected by like, and (b) that like is perceived or known by like,
for perceiving, and also both thinking and knowing, are, on their
own assumption, ways of being affected or moved. 

There are many puzzles and difficulties raised by saying, as Empedocles
does, that each set of things is known by means of its corporeal elements
and by reference to something in soul which is like them, and additional
testimony is furnished by this new consideration; for all the parts
of the animal body which consist wholly of earth such as bones, sinews,
and hair seem to be wholly insensitive and consequently not perceptive
even of objects earthy like themselves, as they ought to have been.

Further, each of the principles will have far more ignorance than
knowledge, for though each of them will know one thing, there will
be many of which it will be ignorant. Empedocles at any rate must
conclude that his God is the least intelligent of all beings, for
of him alone is it true that there is one thing, Strife, which he
does not know, while there is nothing which mortal beings do not know,
for ere is nothing which does not enter into their composition.

In general, we may ask, Why has not everything a soul, since everything
either is an element, or is formed out of one or several or all of
the elements? Each must certainly know one or several or all.

The problem might also be raised, What is that which unifies the elements
into a soul? The elements correspond, it would appear, to the matter;
what unites them, whatever it is, is the supremely important factor.
But it is impossible that there should be something superior to, and
dominant over, the soul (and a fortiori over the mind); it is reasonable
to hold that mind is by nature most primordial and dominant, while
their statement that it is the elements which are first of all that
is. 

All, both those who assert that the soul, because of its knowledge
or perception of what is compounded out of the elements, and is those
who assert that it is of all things the most originative of movement,
fail to take into consideration all kinds of soul. In fact (1) not
all beings that perceive can originate movement; there appear to be
certain animals which stationary, and yet local movement is the only
one, so it seems, which the soul originates in animals. And (2) the
same object-on holds against all those who construct mind and the
perceptive faculty out of the elements; for it appears that plants
live, and yet are not endowed with locomotion or perception, while
a large number of animals are without discourse of reason. Even if
these points were waived and mind admitted to be a part of the soul
(and so too the perceptive faculty), still, even so, there would be
kinds and parts of soul of which they had failed to give any account.

The same objection lies against the view expressed in the 'Orphic'
poems: there it is said that the soul comes in from the whole when
breathing takes place, being borne in upon the winds. Now this cannot
take place in the case of plants, nor indeed in the case of certain
classes of animal, for not all classes of animal breathe. This fact
has escaped the notice of the holders of this view.
