---
obra_pt: "Analíticos Posteriores"
obra_en: "Posterior Analytics"
categoria: 01_organon
obra_slug: 04_analiticos_posteriores
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Mure
livro_num: 2
livro_marker: "BOOK II"
total_livros: 2
capitulo_num: 11
capitulo_marker: "Part 11"
total_capitulos_no_livro: 18
bytes: 12217
chars_aprox: 12217
---

We think we have scientific knowledge when we know the cause, and
there are four causes: (1) the definable form, (2) an antecedent which
necessitates a consequent, (3) the efficient cause, (4) the final
cause. Hence each of these can be the middle term of a proof, for
(a) though the inference from antecedent to necessary consequent does
not hold if only one premiss is assumed-two is the minimum-still when
there are two it holds on condition that they have a single common
middle term. So it is from the assumption of this single middle term
that the conclusion follows necessarily. The following example will
also show this. Why is the angle in a semicircle a right angle?-or
from what assumption does it follow that it is a right angle? Thus,
let A be right angle, B the half of two right angles, C the angle
in a semicircle. Then B is the cause in virtue of which A, right angle,
is attributable to C, the angle in a semicircle, since B=A and the
other, viz. C,=B, for C is half of two right angles. Therefore it
is the assumption of B, the half of two right angles, from which it
follows that A is attributable to C, i.e. that the angle in a semicircle
is a right angle. Moreover, B is identical with (b) the defining form
of A, since it is what A's definition signifies. Moreover, the formal
cause has already been shown to be the middle. (c) 'Why did the Athenians
become involved in the Persian war?' means 'What cause originated
the waging of war against the Athenians?' and the answer is, 'Because
they raided Sardis with the Eretrians', since this originated the
war. Let A be war, B unprovoked raiding, C the Athenians. Then B,
unprovoked raiding, is true of C, the Athenians, and A is true of
B, since men make war on the unjust aggressor. So A, having war waged
upon them, is true of B, the initial aggressors, and B is true of
C, the Athenians, who were the aggressors. Hence here too the cause-in
this case the efficient cause-is the middle term. (d) This is no less
true where the cause is the final cause. E.g. why does one take a
walk after supper? For the sake of one's health. Why does a house
exist? For the preservation of one's goods. The end in view is in
the one case health, in the other preservation. To ask the reason
why one must walk after supper is precisely to ask to what end one
must do it. Let C be walking after supper, B the non-regurgitation
of food, A health. Then let walking after supper possess the property
of preventing food from rising to the orifice of the stomach, and
let this condition be healthy; since it seems that B, the non-regurgitation
of food, is attributable to C, taking a walk, and that A, health,
is attributable to B. What, then, is the cause through which A, the
final cause, inheres in C? It is B, the non-regurgitation of food;
but B is a kind of definition of A, for A will be explained by it.
Why is B the cause of A's belonging to C? Because to be in a condition
such as B is to be in health. The definitions must be transposed,
and then the detail will become clearer. Incidentally, here the order
of coming to be is the reverse of what it is in proof through the
efficient cause: in the efficient order the middle term must come
to be first, whereas in the teleological order the minor, C, must
first take place, and the end in view comes last in time.

The same thing may exist for an end and be necessitated as well. For
example, light shines through a lantern (1) because that which consists
of relatively small particles necessarily passes through pores larger
than those particles-assuming that light does issue by penetration-
and (2) for an end, namely to save us from stumbling. If then, a thing
can exist through two causes, can it come to be through two causes-as
for instance if thunder be a hiss and a roar necessarily produced
by the quenching of fire, and also designed, as the Pythagoreans say,
for a threat to terrify those that lie in Tartarus? Indeed, there
are very many such cases, mostly among the processes and products
of the natural world; for nature, in different senses of the term
'nature', produces now for an end, now by necessity. 

Necessity too is of two kinds. It may work in accordance with a thing's
natural tendency, or by constraint and in opposition to it; as, for
instance, by necessity a stone is borne both upwards and downwards,
but not by the same necessity. 

Of the products of man's intelligence some are never due to chance
or necessity but always to an end, as for example a house or a statue;
others, such as health or safety, may result from chance as well.

It is mostly in cases where the issue is indeterminate (though only
where the production does not originate in chance, and the end is
consequently good), that a result is due to an end, and this is true
alike in nature or in art. By chance, on the other hand, nothing comes
to be for an end. 

Part 12 The effect may be still coming to be, or its occurrence may
be past or future, yet the cause will be the same as when it is actually
existent-for it is the middle which is the cause-except that if the
effect actually exists the cause is actually existent, if it is coming
to be so is the cause, if its occurrence is past the cause is past,
if future the cause is future. For example, the moon was eclipsed
because the earth intervened, is becoming eclipsed because the earth
is in process of intervening, will be eclipsed because the earth will
intervene, is eclipsed because the earth intervenes. 

To take a second example: assuming that the definition of ice is solidified
water, let C be water, A solidified, B the middle, which is the cause,
namely total failure of heat. Then B is attributed to C, and A, solidification,
to B: ice when B is occurring, has formed when B has occurred, and
will form when B shall occur. 

This sort of cause, then, and its effect come to be simultaneously
when they are in process of becoming, and exist simultaneously when
they actually exist; and the same holds good when they are past and
when they are future. But what of cases where they are not simultaneous?
Can causes and effects different from one another form, as they seem
to us to form, a continuous succession, a past effect resulting from
a past cause different from itself, a future effect from a future
cause different from it, and an effect which is coming-to-be from
a cause different from and prior to it? Now on this theory it is from
the posterior event that we reason (and this though these later events
actually have their source of origin in previous events--a fact which
shows that also when the effect is coming-to-be we still reason from
the posterior event), and from the event we cannot reason (we cannot
argue that because an event A has occurred, therefore an event B has
occurred subsequently to A but still in the past-and the same holds
good if the occurrence is future)-cannot reason because, be the time
interval definite or indefinite, it will never be possible to infer
that because it is true to say that A occurred, therefore it is true
to say that B, the subsequent event, occurred; for in the interval
between the events, though A has already occurred, the latter statement
will be false. And the same argument applies also to future events;
i.e. one cannot infer from an event which occurred in the past that
a future event will occur. The reason of this is that the middle must
be homogeneous, past when the extremes are past, future when they
are future, coming to be when they are coming-to-be, actually existent
when they are actually existent; and there cannot be a middle term
homogeneous with extremes respectively past and future. And it is
a further difficulty in this theory that the time interval can be
neither indefinite nor definite, since during it the inference will
be false. We have also to inquire what it is that holds events together
so that the coming-to-be now occurring in actual things follows upon
a past event. It is evident, we may suggest, that a past event and
a present process cannot be 'contiguous', for not even two past events
can be 'contiguous'. For past events are limits and atomic; so just
as points are not 'contiguous' neither are past events, since both
are indivisible. For the same reason a past event and a present process
cannot be 'contiguous', for the process is divisible, the event indivisible.
Thus the relation of present process to past event is analogous to
that of line to point, since a process contains an infinity of past
events. These questions, however, must receive a more explicit treatment
in our general theory of change. 

The following must suffice as an account of the manner in which the
middle would be identical with the cause on the supposition that coming-to-be
is a series of consecutive events: for in the terms of such a series
too the middle and major terms must form an immediate premiss; e.g.
we argue that, since C has occurred, therefore A occurred: and C's
occurrence was posterior, A's prior; but C is the source of the inference
because it is nearer to the present moment, and the starting-point
of time is the present. We next argue that, since D has occurred,
therefore C occurred. Then we conclude that, since D has occurred,
therefore A must have occurred; and the cause is C, for since D has
occurred C must have occurred, and since C has occurred A must previously
have occurred. 

If we get our middle term in this way, will the series terminate in
an immediate premiss, or since, as we said, no two events are 'contiguous',
will a fresh middle term always intervene because there is an infinity
of middles? No: though no two events are 'contiguous', yet we must
start from a premiss consisting of a middle and the present event
as major. The like is true of future events too, since if it is true
to say that D will exist, it must be a prior truth to say that A will
exist, and the cause of this conclusion is C; for if D will exist,
C will exist prior to D, and if C will exist, A will exist prior to
it. And here too the same infinite divisibility might be urged, since
future events are not 'contiguous'. But here too an immediate basic
premiss must be assumed. And in the world of fact this is so: if a
house has been built, then blocks must have been quarried and shaped.
The reason is that a house having been built necessitates a foundation
having been laid, and if a foundation has been laid blocks must have
been shaped beforehand. Again, if a house will be built, blocks will
similarly be shaped beforehand; and proof is through the middle in
the same way, for the foundation will exist before the house.

Now we observe in Nature a certain kind of circular process of coming-to-be;
and this is possible only if the middle and extreme terms are reciprocal,
since conversion is conditioned by reciprocity in the terms of the
proof. This-the convertibility of conclusions and premisses-has been
proved in our early chapters, and the circular process is an instance
of this. In actual fact it is exemplified thus: when the earth had
been moistened an exhalation was bound to rise, and when an exhalation
had risen cloud was bound to form, and from the formation of cloud
rain necessarily resulted and by the fall of rain the earth was necessarily
moistened: but this was the starting-point, so that a circle is completed;
for posit any one of the terms and another follows from it, and from
that another, and from that again the first. 

Some occurrences are universal (for they are, or come-to-be what they
are, always and in ever case); others again are not always what they
are but only as a general rule: for instance, not every man can grow
a beard, but it is the general rule. In the case of such connexions
the middle term too must be a general rule. For if A is predicated
universally of B and B of C, A too must be predicated always and in
every instance of C, since to hold in every instance and always is
of the nature of the universal. But we have assumed a connexion which
is a general rule; consequently the middle term B must also be a general
rule. So connexions which embody a general rule-i.e. which exist or
come to be as a general rule-will also derive from immediate basic
premisses.
