---
obra_pt: "Analíticos Posteriores"
obra_en: "Posterior Analytics"
categoria: 01_organon
obra_slug: 04_analiticos_posteriores
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Mure
livro_num: 2
livro_marker: "BOOK II"
total_livros: 2
capitulo_num: 13
capitulo_marker: "Part 13"
total_capitulos_no_livro: 18
bytes: 11444
chars_aprox: 11444
---

We have already explained how essential nature is set out in the terms
of a demonstration, and the sense in which it is or is not demonstrable
or definable; so let us now discuss the method to be adopted in tracing
the elements predicated as constituting the definable form.

Now of the attributes which inhere always in each several thing there
are some which are wider in extent than it but not wider than its
genus (by attributes of wider extent mean all such as are universal
attributes of each several subject, but in their application are not
confined to that subject). while an attribute may inhere in every
triad, yet also in a subject not a triad-as being inheres in triad
but also in subjects not numbers at all-odd on the other hand is an
attribute inhering in every triad and of wider application (inhering
as it does also in pentad), but which does not extend beyond the genus
of triad; for pentad is a number, but nothing outside number is odd.
It is such attributes which we have to select, up to the exact point
at which they are severally of wider extent than the subject but collectively
coextensive with it; for this synthesis must be the substance of the
thing. For example every triad possesses the attributes number, odd,
and prime in both senses, i.e. not only as possessing no divisors,
but also as not being a sum of numbers. This, then, is precisely what
triad is, viz. a number, odd, and prime in the former and also the
latter sense of the term: for these attributes taken severally apply,
the first two to all odd numbers, the last to the dyad also as well
as to the triad, but, taken collectively, to no other subject. Now
since we have shown above' that attributes predicated as belonging
to the essential nature are necessary and that universals are necessary,
and since the attributes which we select as inhering in triad, or
in any other subject whose attributes we select in this way, are predicated
as belonging to its essential nature, triad will thus possess these
attributes necessarily. Further, that the synthesis of them constitutes
the substance of triad is shown by the following argument. If it is
not identical with the being of triad, it must be related to triad
as a genus named or nameless. It will then be of wider extent than
triad-assuming that wider potential extent is the character of a genus.
If on the other hand this synthesis is applicable to no subject other
than the individual triads, it will be identical with the being of
triad, because we make the further assumption that the substance of
each subject is the predication of elements in its essential nature
down to the last differentia characterizing the individuals. It follows
that any other synthesis thus exhibited will likewise be identical
with the being of the subject. 

The author of a hand-book on a subject that is a generic whole should
divide the genus into its first infimae species-number e.g. into triad
and dyad-and then endeavour to seize their definitions by the method
we have described-the definition, for example, of straight line or
circle or right angle. After that, having established what the category
is to which the subaltern genus belongs-quantity or quality, for instance-he
should examine the properties 'peculiar' to the species, working through
the proximate common differentiae. He should proceed thus because
the attributes of the genera compounded of the infimae species will
be clearly given by the definitions of the species; since the basic
element of them all is the definition, i.e. the simple infirma species,
and the attributes inhere essentially in the simple infimae species,
in the genera only in virtue of these. 

Divisions according to differentiae are a useful accessory to this
method. What force they have as proofs we did, indeed, explain above,
but that merely towards collecting the essential nature they may be
of use we will proceed to show. They might, indeed, seem to be of
no use at all, but rather to assume everything at the start and to
be no better than an initial assumption made without division. But,
in fact, the order in which the attributes are predicated does make
a difference--it matters whether we say animal-tame-biped, or biped-animal-tame.
For if every definable thing consists of two elements and 'animal-tame'
forms a unity, and again out of this and the further differentia man
(or whatever else is the unity under construction) is constituted,
then the elements we assume have necessarily been reached by division.
Again, division is the only possible method of avoiding the omission
of any element of the essential nature. Thus, if the primary genus
is assumed and we then take one of the lower divisions, the dividendum
will not fall whole into this division: e.g. it is not all animal
which is either whole-winged or split-winged but all winged animal,
for it is winged animal to which this differentiation belongs. The
primary differentiation of animal is that within which all animal
falls. The like is true of every other genus, whether outside animal
or a subaltern genus of animal; e.g. the primary differentiation of
bird is that within which falls every bird, of fish that within which
falls every fish. So, if we proceed in this way, we can be sure that
nothing has been omitted: by any other method one is bound to omit
something without knowing it. 

To define and divide one need not know the whole of existence. Yet
some hold it impossible to know the differentiae distinguishing each
thing from every single other thing without knowing every single other
thing; and one cannot, they say, know each thing without knowing its
differentiae, since everything is identical with that from which it
does not differ, and other than that from which it differs. Now first
of all this is a fallacy: not every differentia precludes identity,
since many differentiae inhere in things specifically identical, though
not in the substance of these nor essentially. Secondly, when one
has taken one's differing pair of opposites and assumed that the two
sides exhaust the genus, and that the subject one seeks to define
is present in one or other of them, and one has further verified its
presence in one of them; then it does not matter whether or not one
knows all the other subjects of which the differentiae are also predicated.
For it is obvious that when by this process one reaches subjects incapable
of further differentiation one will possess the formula defining the
substance. Moreover, to postulate that the division exhausts the genus
is not illegitimate if the opposites exclude a middle; since if it
is the differentia of that genus, anything contained in the genus
must lie on one of the two sides. 

In establishing a definition by division one should keep three objects
in view: (1) the admission only of elements in the definable form,
(2) the arrangement of these in the right order, (3) the omission
of no such elements. The first is feasible because one can establish
genus and differentia through the topic of the genus, just as one
can conclude the inherence of an accident through the topic of the
accident. The right order will be achieved if the right term is assumed
as primary, and this will be ensured if the term selected is predicable
of all the others but not all they of it; since there must be one
such term. Having assumed this we at once proceed in the same way
with the lower terms; for our second term will be the first of the
remainder, our third the first of those which follow the second in
a 'contiguous' series, since when the higher term is excluded, that
term of the remainder which is 'contiguous' to it will be primary,
and so on. Our procedure makes it clear that no elements in the definable
form have been omitted: we have taken the differentia that comes first
in the order of division, pointing out that animal, e.g. is divisible
exhaustively into A and B, and that the subject accepts one of the
two as its predicate. Next we have taken the differentia of the whole
thus reached, and shown that the whole we finally reach is not further
divisible-i.e. that as soon as we have taken the last differentia
to form the concrete totality, this totality admits of no division
into species. For it is clear that there is no superfluous addition,
since all these terms we have selected are elements in the definable
form; and nothing lacking, since any omission would have to be a genus
or a differentia. Now the primary term is a genus, and this term taken
in conjunction with its differentiae is a genus: moreover the differentiae
are all included, because there is now no further differentia; if
there were, the final concrete would admit of division into species,
which, we said, is not the case. 

To resume our account of the right method of investigation: We must
start by observing a set of similar-i.e. specifically identical-individuals,
and consider what element they have in common. We must then apply
the same process to another set of individuals which belong to one
species and are generically but not specifically identical with the
former set. When we have established what the common element is in
all members of this second species, and likewise in members of further
species, we should again consider whether the results established
possess any identity, and persevere until we reach a single formula,
since this will be the definition of the thing. But if we reach not
one formula but two or more, evidently the definiendum cannot be one
thing but must be more than one. I may illustrate my meaning as follows.
If we were inquiring what the essential nature of pride is, we should
examine instances of proud men we know of to see what, as such, they
have in common; e.g. if Alcibiades was proud, or Achilles and Ajax
were proud, we should find on inquiring what they all had in common,
that it was intolerance of insult; it was this which drove Alcibiades
to war, Achilles wrath, and Ajax to suicide. We should next examine
other cases, Lysander, for example, or Socrates, and then if these
have in common indifference alike to good and ill fortune, I take
these two results and inquire what common element have equanimity
amid the vicissitudes of life and impatience of dishonour. If they
have none, there will be two genera of pride. Besides, every definition
is always universal and commensurate: the physician does not prescribe
what is healthy for a single eye, but for all eyes or for a determinate
species of eye. It is also easier by this method to define the single
species than the universal, and that is why our procedure should be
from the several species to the universal genera-this for the further
reason too that equivocation is less readily detected in genera than
in infimae species. Indeed, perspicuity is essential in definitions,
just as inferential movement is the minimum required in demonstrations;
and we shall attain perspicuity if we can collect separately the definition
of each species through the group of singulars which we have established
e.g. the definition of similarity not unqualified but restricted to
colours and to figures; the definition of acuteness, but only of sound-and
so proceed to the common universal with a careful avoidance of equivocation.
We may add that if dialectical disputation must not employ metaphors,
clearly metaphors and metaphorical expressions are precluded in definition:
otherwise dialectic would involve metaphors.
