---
cena_id: 02_fisica/01_fisica/L08-C07_cena01
obra_pt: "Física"
obra_en: "Physics"
categoria: 02_fisica
obra_slug: 01_fisica
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Hardie-Gaye
livro_num: 8
livro_marker: "BOOK VIII"
capitulo_num: 7
capitulo_marker: "Part 7"
sub_cena_num: 1
sub_cena_total: 1
audio_in_obra_idx: 70
audio_in_obra_total: 75
chars: 9701
---

This matter will be made clearer, however, if we start afresh from
another point. We must consider whether it is or is not possible that
there should be a continuous motion, and, if it is possible, which
this motion is, and which is the primary motion: for it is plain that
if there must always be motion, and a particular motion is primary
and continuous, then it is this motion that is imparted by the first
movent, and so it is necessarily one and the same and continuous and
primary. 

Now of the three kinds of motion that there are-motion in respect
of magnitude, motion in respect of affection, and motion in respect
of place-it is this last, which we call locomotion, that must be primary.
This may be shown as follows. It is impossible that there should be
increase without the previous occurrence of alteration: for that which
is increased, although in a sense it is increased by what is like
itself, is in a sense increased by what is unlike itself: thus it
is said that contrary is nourishment to contrary: but growth is effected
only by things becoming like to like. There must be alteration, then,
in that there is this change from contrary to contrary. But the fact
that a thing is altered requires that there should be something that
alters it, something e.g. that makes the potentially hot into the
actually hot: so it is plain that the movent does not maintain a uniform
relation to it but is at one time nearer to and at another farther
from that which is altered: and we cannot have this without locomotion.
If, therefore, there must always be motion, there must also always
be locomotion as the primary motion, and, if there is a primary as
distinguished from a secondary form of locomotion, it must be the
primary form. Again, all affections have their origin in condensation
and rarefaction: thus heavy and light, soft and hard, hot and cold,
are considered to be forms of density and rarity. But condensation
and rarefaction are nothing more than combination and separation,
processes in accordance with which substances are said to become and
perish: and in being combined and separated things must change in
respect of place. And further, when a thing is increased or decreased
its magnitude changes in respect of place. 

Again, there is another point of view from which it will be clearly
seen that locomotion is primary. As in the case of other things so
too in the case of motion the word 'primary' may be used in several
senses. A thing is said to be prior to other things when, if it does
not exist, the others will not exist, whereas it can exist without
the others: and there is also priority in time and priority in perfection
of existence. Let us begin, then, with the first sense. Now there
must be motion continuously, and there may be continuously either
continuous motion or successive motion, the former, however, in a
higher degree than the latter: moreover it is better that it should
be continuous rather than successive motion, and we always assume
the presence in nature of the better, if it be possible: since, then,
continuous motion is possible (this will be proved later: for the
present let us take it for granted), and no other motion can be continuous
except locomotion, locomotion must be primary. For there is no necessity
for the subject of locomotion to be the subject either of increase
or of alteration, nor need it become or perish: on the other hand
there cannot be any one of these processes without the existence of
the continuous motion imparted by the first movent. 

Secondly, locomotion must be primary in time: for this is the only
motion possible for things. It is true indeed that, in the case of
any individual thing that has a becoming, locomotion must be the last
of its motions: for after its becoming it first experiences alteration
and increase, and locomotion is a motion that belongs to such things
only when they are perfected. But there must previously be something
else that is in process of locomotion to be the cause even of the
becoming of things that become, without itself being in process of
becoming, as e.g. the begotten is preceded by what begot it: otherwise
becoming might be thought to be the primary motion on the ground that
the thing must first become. But though this is so in the case of
any individual thing that becomes, nevertheless before anything becomes,
something else must be in motion, not itself becoming but being, and
before this there must again be something else. And since becoming
cannot be primary-for, if it were, everything that is in motion would
be perishable-it is plain that no one of the motions next in order
can be prior to locomotion. By the motions next in order I mean increase
and then alteration, decrease, and perishing. All these are posterior
to becoming: consequently, if not even becoming is prior to locomotion,
then no one of the other processes of change is so either.

Thirdly, that which is in process of becoming appears universally
as something imperfect and proceeding to a first principle: and so
what is posterior in the order of becoming is prior in the order of
nature. Now all things that go through the process of becoming acquire
locomotion last. It is this that accounts for the fact that some living
things, e.g. plants and many kinds of animals, owing to lack of the
requisite organ, are entirely without motion, whereas others acquire
it in the course of their being perfected. Therefore, if the degree
in which things possess locomotion corresponds to the degree in which
they have realized their natural development, then this motion must
be prior to all others in respect of perfection of existence: and
not only for this reason but also because a thing that is in motion
loses its essential character less in the process of locomotion than
in any other kind of motion: it is the only motion that does not involve
a change of being in the sense in which there is a change in quality
when a thing is altered and a change in quantity when a thing is increased
or decreased. Above all it is plain that this motion, motion in respect
of place, is what is in the strictest sense produced by that which
moves itself; but it is the self-movent that we declare to be the
first principle of things that are moved and impart motion and the
primary source to which things that are in motion are to be referred.

It is clear, then, from the foregoing arguments that locomotion is
the primary motion. We have now to show which kind of locomotion is
primary. The same process of reasoning will also make clear at the
same time the truth of the assumption we have made both now and at
a previous stage that it is possible that there should be a motion
that is continuous and eternal. Now it is clear from the following
considerations that no other than locomotion can be continuous. Every
other motion and change is from an opposite to an opposite: thus for
the processes of becoming and perishing the limits are the existent
and the non-existent, for alteration the various pairs of contrary
affections, and for increase and decrease either greatness and smallness
or perfection and imperfection of magnitude: and changes to the respective
contraries are contrary changes. Now a thing that is undergoing any
particular kind of motion, but though previously existent has not
always undergone it, must previously have been at rest so far as that
motion is concerned. It is clear, then, that for the changing thing
the contraries will be states of rest. And we have a similar result
in the case of changes that are not motions: for becoming and perishing,
whether regarded simply as such without qualification or as affecting
something in particular, are opposites: therefore provided it is impossible
for a thing to undergo opposite changes at the same time, the change
will not be continuous, but a period of time will intervene between
the opposite processes. The question whether these contradictory changes
are contraries or not makes no difference, provided only it is impossible
for them both to be present to the same thing at the same time: the
point is of no importance to the argument. Nor does it matter if the
thing need not rest in the contradictory state, or if there is no
state of rest as a contrary to the process of change: it may be true
that the non-existent is not at rest, and that perishing is a process
to the non-existent. All that matters is the intervention of a time:
it is this that prevents the change from being continuous: so, too,
in our previous instances the important thing was not the relation
of contrariety but the impossibility of the two processes being present
to a thing at the same time. And there is no need to be disturbed
by the fact that on this showing there may be more than one contrary
to the same thing, that a particular motion will be contrary both
to rest and to motion in the contrary direction. We have only to grasp
the fact that a particular motion is in a sense the opposite both
of a state of rest and of the contrary motion, in the same way as
that which is of equal or standard measure is the opposite both of
that which surpasses it and of that which it surpasses, and that it
is impossible for the opposite motions or changes to be present to
a thing at the same time. Furthermore, in the case of becoming and
perishing it would seem to be an utterly absurd thing if as soon as
anything has become it must necessarily perish and cannot continue
to exist for any time: and, if this is true of becoming and perishing,
we have fair grounds for inferring the same to be true of the other
kinds of change, since it would be in the natural order of things
that they should be uniform in this respect.
