---
cena_id: 02_fisica/01_fisica/L08-C08_cena01
obra_pt: "Física"
obra_en: "Physics"
categoria: 02_fisica
obra_slug: 01_fisica
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Hardie-Gaye
livro_num: 8
livro_marker: "BOOK VIII"
capitulo_num: 8
capitulo_marker: "Part 8"
sub_cena_num: 1
sub_cena_total: 3
audio_in_obra_idx: 71
audio_in_obra_total: 75
chars: 7167
---

Let us now proceed to maintain that it is possible that there should
be an infinite motion that is single and continuous, and that this
motion is rotatory motion. The motion of everything that is in process
of locomotion is either rotatory or rectilinear or a compound of the
two: consequently, if one of the former two is not continuous, that
which is composed of them both cannot be continuous either. Now it
is plain that if the locomotion of a thing is rectilinear and finite
it is not continuous locomotion: for the thing must turn back, and
that which turns back in a straight line undergoes two contrary locomotions,
since, so far as motion in respect of place is concerned, upward motion
is the contrary of downward motion, forward motion of backward motion,
and motion to the left of motion to the right, these being the pairs
of contraries in the sphere of place. But we have already defined
single and continuous motion to be motion of a single thing in a single
period of time and operating within a sphere admitting of no further
specific differentiation (for we have three things to consider, first
that which is in motion, e.g. a man or a god, secondly the 'when'
of the motion, that is to say, the time, and thirdly the sphere within
which it operates, which may be either place or affection or essential
form or magnitude): and contraries are specifically not one and the
same but distinct: and within the sphere of place we have the above-mentioned
distinctions. Moreover we have an indication that motion from A to
B is the contrary of motion from B to A in the fact that, if they
occur at the same time, they arrest and stop each other. And the same
is true in the case of a circle: the motion from A towards B is the
contrary of the motion from A towards G: for even if they are continuous
and there is no turning back they arrest each other, because contraries
annihilate or obstruct one another. On the other hand lateral motion
is not the contrary of upward motion. But what shows most clearly
that rectilinear motion cannot be continuous is the fact that turning
back necessarily implies coming to a stand, not only when it is a
straight line that is traversed, but also in the case of locomotion
in a circle (which is not the same thing as rotatory locomotion: for,
when a thing merely traverses a circle, it may either proceed on its
course without a break or turn back again when it has reached the
same point from which it started). We may assure ourselves of the
necessity of this coming to a stand not only on the strength of observation,
but also on theoretical grounds. We may start as follows: we have
three points, starting-point, middle-point, and finishing-point, of
which the middle-point in virtue of the relations in which it stands
severally to the other two is both a starting-point and a finishing-point,
and though numerically one is theoretically two. We have further the
distinction between the potential and the actual. So in the straight
line in question any one of the points lying between the two extremes
is potentially a middle-point: but it is not actually so unless that
which is in motion divides the line by coming to a stand at that point
and beginning its motion again: thus the middle-point becomes both
a starting-point and a goal, the starting-point of the latter part
and the finishing-point of the first part of the motion. This is the
case e.g. when A in the course of its locomotion comes to a stand
at B and starts again towards G: but when its motion is continuous
A cannot either have come to be or have ceased to be at the point
B: it can only have been there at the moment of passing, its passage
not being contained within any period of time except the whole of
which the particular moment is a dividing-point. To maintain that
it has come to be and ceased to be there will involve the consequence
that A in the course of its locomotion will always be coming to a
stand: for it is impossible that A should simultaneously have come
to be at B and ceased to be there, so that the two things must have
happened at different points of time, and therefore there will be
the intervening period of time: consequently A will be in a state
of rest at B, and similarly at all other points, since the same reasoning
holds good in every case. When to A, that which is in process of locomotion,
B, the middle-point, serves both as a finishing-point and as a starting-point
for its motion, A must come to a stand at B, because it makes it two
just as one might do in thought. However, the point A is the real
starting-point at which the moving body has ceased to be, and it is
at G that it has really come to be when its course is finished and
it comes to a stand. So this is how we must meet the difficulty that
then arises, which is as follows. Suppose the line E is equal to the
line Z, that A proceeds in continuous locomotion from the extreme
point of E to G, and that, at the moment when A is at the point B,
D is proceeding in uniform locomotion and with the same velocity as
A from the extremity of Z to H: then, says the argument, D will have
reached H before A has reached G for that which makes an earlier start
and departure must make an earlier arrival: the reason, then, for
the late arrival of A is that it has not simultaneously come to be
and ceased to be at B: otherwise it will not arrive later: for this
to happen it will be necessary that it should come to a stand there.
Therefore we must not hold that there was a moment when A came to
be at B and that at the same moment D was in motion from the extremity
of Z: for the fact of A's having come to be at B will involve the
fact of its also ceasing to be there, and the two events will not
be simultaneous, whereas the truth is that A is at B at a sectional
point of time and does not occupy time there. In this case, therefore,
where the motion of a thing is continuous, it is impossible to use
this form of expression. On the other hand in the case of a thing
that turns back in its course we must do so. For suppose H in the
course of its locomotion proceeds to D and then turns back and proceeds
downwards again: then the extreme point D has served as finishing-point
and as starting-point for it, one point thus serving as two: therefore
H must have come to a stand there: it cannot have come to be at D
and departed from D simultaneously, for in that case it would simultaneously
be there and not be there at the same moment. And here we cannot apply
the argument used to solve the difficulty stated above: we cannot
argue that H is at D at a sectional point of time and has not come
to be or ceased to be there. For here the goal that is reached is
necessarily one that is actually, not potentially, existent. Now the
point in the middle is potential: but this one is actual, and regarded
from below it is a finishing-point, while regarded from above it is
a starting-point, so that it stands in these same two respective relations
to the two motions. Therefore that which turns back in traversing
a rectilinear course must in so doing come to a stand. Consequently
there cannot be a continuous rectilinear motion that is eternal.
