---
cena_id: 02_fisica/01_fisica/L08-C08_cena02
obra_pt: "Física"
obra_en: "Physics"
categoria: 02_fisica
obra_slug: 01_fisica
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Hardie-Gaye
livro_num: 8
livro_marker: "BOOK VIII"
capitulo_num: 8
capitulo_marker: "Part 8"
sub_cena_num: 2
sub_cena_total: 3
audio_in_obra_idx: 72
audio_in_obra_total: 75
chars: 7743
---

The same method should also be adopted in replying to those who ask,
in the terms of Zeno's argument, whether we admit that before any
distance can be traversed half the distance must be traversed, that
these half-distances are infinite in number, and that it is impossible
to traverse distances infinite in number-or some on the lines of this
same argument put the questions in another form, and would have us
grant that in the time during which a motion is in progress it should
be possible to reckon a half-motion before the whole for every half-distance
that we get, so that we have the result that when the whole distance
is traversed we have reckoned an infinite number, which is admittedly
impossible. Now when we first discussed the question of motion we
put forward a solution of this difficulty turning on the fact that
the period of time occupied in traversing the distance contains within
itself an infinite number of units: there is no absurdity, we said,
in supposing the traversing of infinite distances in infinite time,
and the element of infinity is present in the time no less than in
the distance. But, although this solution is adequate as a reply to
the questioner (the question asked being whether it is possible in
a finite time to traverse or reckon an infinite number of units),
nevertheless as an account of the fact and explanation of its true
nature it is inadequate. For suppose the distance to be left out of
account and the question asked to be no longer whether it is possible
in a finite time to traverse an infinite number of distances, and
suppose that the inquiry is made to refer to the time taken by itself
(for the time contains an infinite number of divisions): then this
solution will no longer be adequate, and we must apply the truth that
we enunciated in our recent discussion, stating it in the following
way. In the act of dividing the continuous distance into two halves
one point is treated as two, since we make it a starting-point and
a finishing-point: and this same result is also produced by the act
of reckoning halves as well as by the act of dividing into halves.
But if divisions are made in this way, neither the distance nor the
motion will be continuous: for motion if it is to be continuous must
relate to what is continuous: and though what is continuous contains
an infinite number of halves, they are not actual but potential halves.
If the halves are made actual, we shall get not a continuous but an
intermittent motion. In the case of reckoning the halves, it is clear
that this result follows: for then one point must be reckoned as two:
it will be the finishing-point of the one half and the starting-point
of the other, if we reckon not the one continuous whole but the two
halves. Therefore to the question whether it is possible to pass through
an infinite number of units either of time or of distance we must
reply that in a sense it is and in a sense it is not. If the units
are actual, it is not possible: if they are potential, it is possible.
For in the course of a continuous motion the traveller has traversed
an infinite number of units in an accidental sense but not in an unqualified
sense: for though it is an accidental characteristic of the distance
to be an infinite number of half-distances, this is not its real and
essential character. It is also plain that unless we hold that the
point of time that divides earlier from later always belongs only
to the later so far as the thing is concerned, we shall be involved
in the consequence that the same thing is at the same moment existent
and not existent, and that a thing is not existent at the moment when
it has become. It is true that the point is common to both times,
the earlier as well as the later, and that, while numerically one
and the same, it is theoretically not so, being the finishing-point
of the one and the starting-point of the other: but so far as the
thing is concerned it belongs to the later stage of what happens to
it. Let us suppose a time ABG and a thing D, D being white in the
time A and not-white in the time B. Then D is at the moment G white
and not-white: for if we were right in saying that it is white during
the whole time A, it is true to call it white at any moment of A,
and not-white in B, and G is in both A and B. We must not allow, therefore,
that it is white in the whole of A, but must say that it is so in
all of it except the last moment G. G belongs already to the later
period, and if in the whole of A not-white was in process of becoming
and white of perishing, at G the process is complete. And so G is
the first moment at which it is true to call the thing white or not
white respectively. Otherwise a thing may be non-existent at the moment
when it has become and existent at the moment when it has perished:
or else it must be possible for a thing at the same time to be white
and not white and in fact to be existent and non-existent. Further,
if anything that exists after having been previously non-existent
must become existent and does not exist when it is becoming, time
cannot be divisible into time-atoms. For suppose that D was becoming
white in the time A and that at another time B, a time-atom consecutive
with the last atom of A, D has already become white and so is white
at that moment: then, inasmuch as in the time A it was becoming white
and so was not white and at the moment B it is white, there must have
been a becoming between A and B and therefore also a time in which
the becoming took place. On the other hand, those who deny atoms of
time (as we do) are not affected by this argument: according to them
D has become and so is white at the last point of the actual time
in which it was becoming white: and this point has no other point
consecutive with or in succession to it, whereas time-atoms are conceived
as successive. Moreover it is clear that if D was becoming white in
the whole time A, the time occupied by it in having become white in
addition to having been in process of becoming white is no more than
all that it occupied in the mere process of becoming white.

These and such-like, then, are the arguments for our conclusion that
derive cogency from the fact that they have a special bearing on the
point at issue. If we look at the question from the point of view
of general theory, the same result would also appear to be indicated
by the following arguments. Everything whose motion is continuous
must, on arriving at any point in the course of its locomotion, have
been previously also in process of locomotion to that point, if it
is not forced out of its path by anything: e.g. on arriving at B a
thing must also have been in process of locomotion to B, and that
not merely when it was near to B, but from the moment of its starting
on its course, since there can be, no reason for its being so at any
particular stage rather than at an earlier one. So, too, in the case
of the other kinds of motion. Now we are to suppose that a thing proceeds
in locomotion from A to G and that at the moment of its arrival at
G the continuity of its motion is unbroken and will remain so until
it has arrived back at A. Then when it is undergoing locomotion from
A to G it is at the same time undergoing also its locomotion to A
from G: consequently it is simultaneously undergoing two contrary
motions, since the two motions that follow the same straight line
are contrary to each other. With this consequence there also follows
another: we have a thing that is in process of change from a position
in which it has not yet been: so, inasmuch as this is impossible,
the thing must come to a stand at G. Therefore the motion is not a
single motion, since motion that is interrupted by stationariness
is not single.
