---
obra_pt: "Tópicos"
obra_en: "Topics"
categoria: 01_organon
obra_slug: 05_topicos
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Pickard-Cambridge
livro_num: 1
livro_marker: "BOOK I"
total_livros: 8
capitulo_num: 15
capitulo_marker: "Part 15"
total_capitulos_no_livro: 18
bytes: 11667
chars_aprox: 11667
---

On the formation, then, of propositions, the above remarks are enough.
As regards the number of senses a term bears, we must not only treat
of those terms which bear different senses, but we must also try to
render their definitions; e.g. we must not merely say that justice
and courage are called 'good' in one sense, and that what conduces
to vigour and what conduces to health are called so in another, but
also that the former are so called because of a certain intrinsic
quality they themselves have, the latter because they are productive
of a certain result and not because of any intrinsic quality in themselves.
Similarly also in other cases. 

Whether a term bears a number of specific meanings or one only, may
be considered by the following means. First, look and see if its contrary
bears a number of meanings, whether the discrepancy between them be
one of kind or one of names. For in some cases a difference is at
once displayed even in the names; e.g. the contrary of 'sharp' in
the case of a note is 'flat', while in the case of a solid edge it
is 'dull'. Clearly, then, the contrary of 'sharp' bears several meanings,
and if so, also does 'sharp'; for corresponding to each of the former
terms the meaning of its contrary will be different. For 'sharp' will
not be the same when contrary to 'dull' and to 'flat', though 'sharp'
is the contrary of each. Again Barhu ('flat', 'heavy') in the case
of a note has 'sharp' as its contrary, but in the case of a solid
mass 'light', so that Barhu is used with a number of meanings, inasmuch
as its contrary also is so used. Likewise, also, 'fine' as applied
to a picture has 'ugly' as its contrary, but, as applied to a house,
'ramshackle'; so that 'fine' is an ambiguous term. 

In some cases there is no discrepancy of any sort in the names used,
but a difference of kind between the meanings is at once obvious:
e.g. in the case of 'clear' and 'obscure': for sound is called 'clear'
and 'obscure', just as 'colour' is too. As regards the names, then,
there is no discrepancy, but the difference in kind between the meanings
is at once obvious: for colour is not called 'clear' in a like sense
to sound. This is plain also through sensation: for of things that
are the same in kind we have the same sensation, whereas we do not
judge clearness by the same sensation in the case of sound and of
colour, but in the latter case we judge by sight, in the former by
hearing. Likewise also with 'sharp' and 'dull' in regard to flavours
and solid edges: here in the latter case we judge by touch, but in
the former by taste. For here again there is no discrepancy in the
names used, in the case either of the original terms or of their contraries:
for the contrary also of sharp in either sense is 'dull'.

Moreover, see if one sense of a term has a contrary, while another
has absolutely none; e.g. the pleasure of drinking has a contrary
in the pain of thirst, whereas the pleasure of seeing that the diagonal
is incommensurate with the side has none, so that 'pleasure' is used
in more than one sense. To 'love' also, used of the frame of mind,
has to 'hate' as its contrary, while as used of the physical activity
(kissing) it has none: clearly, therefore, to 'love' is an ambiguous
term. Further, see in regard to their intermediates, if some meanings
and their contraries have an intermediate, others have none, or if
both have one but not the same one, e.g. 'clear' and 'obscure' in
the case of colours have 'grey' as an intermediate, whereas in the
case of sound they have none, or, if they have, it is 'harsh', as
some people say that a harsh sound is intermediate. 'Clear', then,
is an ambiguous term, and likewise also 'obscure'. See, moreover,
if some of them have more than one intermediate, while others have
but one, as is the case with 'clear' and 'obscure', for in the case
of colours there are numbers of intermediates, whereas in regard to
sound there is but one, viz. 'harsh'. 

Again, in the case of the contradictory opposite, look and see if
it bears more than one meaning. For if this bears more than one meaning,
then the opposite of it also will be used in more than one meaning;
e.g. 'to fail to see' a phrase with more than one meaning, viz. (1)
to fail to possess the power of sight, (2) to fail to put that power
to active use. But if this has more than one meaning, it follows necessarily
that 'to see' also has more than one meaning: for there will be an
opposite to each sense of 'to fail to see'; e.g. the opposite of 'not
to possess the power of sight' is to possess it, while of 'not to
put the power of sight to active use', the opposite is to put it to
active use. 

Moreover, examine the case of terms that denote the privation or presence
of a certain state: for if the one term bears more than one meaning,
then so will the remaining term: e.g. if 'to have sense' be used with
more than one meaning, as applied to the soul and to the body, then
'to be wanting in sense' too will be used with more than one meaning,
as applied to the soul and to the body. That the opposition between
the terms now in question depends upon the privation or presence of
a certain state is clear, since animals naturally possess each kind
of 'sense', both as applied to the soul and as applied to the body.

Moreover, examine the inflected forms. For if 'justly' has more than
one meaning, then 'just', also, will be used with more than one meaning;
for there will be a meaning of 'just' to each of the meanings of 'justly';
e.g. if the word 'justly' be used of judging according to one's own
opinion, and also of judging as one ought, then 'just' also will be
used in like manner. In the same way also, if 'healthy' has more than
one meaning, then 'healthily' also will be used with more than one
meaning: e.g. if 'healthy' describes both what produces health and
what preserves health and what betokens health, then 'healthily' also
will be used to mean 'in such a way as to produce' or 'preserve' or
'betoken' health. Likewise also in other cases, whenever the original
term bears more than one meaning, the inflexion also that is formed
from it will be used with more than one meaning, and vice versa.

Look also at the classes of the predicates signified by the term,
and see if they are the same in all cases. For if they are not the
same, then clearly the term is ambiguous: e.g. 'good' in the case
of food means 'productive of pleasure', and in the case of medicine
'productive of health', whereas as applied to the soul it means to
be of a certain quality, e.g. temperate or courageous or just: and
likewise also, as applied to 'man'. Sometimes it signifies what happens
at a certain time, as (e.g.) the good that happens at the right time:
for what happens at the right time is called good. Often it signifies
what is of certain quantity, e.g. as applied to the proper amount:
for the proper amount too is called good. So then the term 'good'
is ambiguous. In the same way also 'clear', as applied to a body,
signifies a colour, but in regard to a note it denotes what is 'easy
to hear'. 'Sharp', too, is in a closely similar case: for the same
term does not bear the same meaning in all its applications: for a
sharp note is a swift note, as the mathematical theorists of harmony
tell us, whereas a sharp (acute) angle is one that is less than a
right angle, while a sharp dagger is one containing a sharp angle
(point). 

Look also at the genera of the objects denoted by the same term, and
see if they are different without being subaltern, as (e.g.) 'donkey',
which denotes both the animal and the engine. For the definition of
them that corresponds to the name is different: for the one will be
declared to be an animal of a certain kind, and the other to be an
engine of a certain kind. If, however, the genera be subaltern, there
is no necessity for the definitions to be different. Thus (e.g.) 'animal'
is the genus of 'raven', and so is 'bird'. Whenever therefore we say
that the raven is a bird, we also say that it is a certain kind of
animal, so that both the genera are predicated of it. Likewise also
whenever we call the raven a 'flying biped animal', we declare it
to be a bird: in this way, then, as well, both the genera are predicated
of raven, and also their definition. But in the case of genera that
are not subaltern this does not happen, for whenever we call a thing
an 'engine', we do not call it an animal, nor vice versa.

Look also and see not only if the genera of the term before you are
different without being subaltern, but also in the case of its contrary:
for if its contrary bears several senses, clearly the term before
you does so as well. 

It is useful also to look at the definition that arises from the use
of the term in combination, e.g. of a 'clear (lit. white) body' of
a 'clear note'. For then if what is peculiar in each case be abstracted,
the same expression ought to remain over. This does not happen in
the case of ambiguous terms, e.g. in the cases just mentioned. For
the former will be body possessing such and such a colour', while
the latter will be 'a note easy to hear'. Abstract, then, 'a body
'and' a note', and the remainder in each case is not the same. It
should, however, have been had the meaning of 'clear' in each case
been synonymous. 

Often in the actual definitions as well ambiguity creeps in unawares,
and for this reason the definitions also should be examined. If (e.g.)
any one describes what betokens and what produces health as 'related
commensurably to health', we must not desist but go on to examine
in what sense he has used the term 'commensurably' in each case, e.g.
if in the latter case it means that 'it is of the right amount to
produce health', whereas in the for it means that 'it is such as to
betoken what kind of state prevails'. 

Moreover, see if the terms cannot be compared as 'more or less' or
as 'in like manner', as is the case (e.g.) with a 'clear' (lit. white)
sound and a 'clear' garment, and a 'sharp' flavour and a 'sharp' note.
For neither are these things said to be clear or sharp 'in a like
degree', nor yet is the one said to be clearer or sharper than the
other. 'Clear', then, and 'sharp' are ambiguous. For synonyms are
always comparable; for they will always be used either in like manner,
or else in a greater degree in one case. 

Now since of genera that are different without being subaltern the
differentiae also are different in kind, e.g. those of 'animal' and
'knowledge' (for the differentiae of these are different), look and
see if the meanings comprised under the same term are differentiae
of genera that are different without being subaltern, as e.g. 'sharp'
is of a 'note' and a 'solid'. For being 'sharp' differentiates note
from note, and likewise also one solid from another. 'Sharp', then,
is an ambiguous term: for it forms differentiae of genera that are
different without being subaltern. 

Again, see if the actual meanings included under the same term themselves
have different differentiae, e.g. 'colour' in bodies and 'colour'
in tunes: for the differentiae of 'colour' in bodies are 'sight-piercing'
and 'sight compressing', whereas 'colour' in melodies has not the
same differentiae. Colour, then, is an ambiguous term; for things
that are the same have the same differentiae. 

Moreover, since the species is never the differentia of anything,
look and see if one of the meanings included under the same term be
a species and another a differentia, as (e.g.) clear' (lit. white)
as applied to a body is a species of colour, whereas in the case of
a note it is a differentia; for one note is differentiated from another
by being 'clear'.
