---
obra_pt: "Tópicos"
obra_en: "Topics"
categoria: 01_organon
obra_slug: 05_topicos
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Pickard-Cambridge
livro_num: 4
livro_marker: "BOOK IV"
total_livros: 8
capitulo_num: 5
capitulo_marker: "Part 5"
total_capitulos_no_livro: 6
bytes: 9390
chars_aprox: 9390
---

Again, see if he has placed what is a 'state' inside the genus 'activity',
or an activity inside the genus 'state', e.g. by defining 'sensation'
as 'movement communicated through the body': for sensation is a 'state',
whereas movement is an 'activity'. Likewise, also, if he has said
that memory is a 'state that is retentive of a conception', for memory
is never a state, but rather an activity. 

They also make a bad mistake who rank a 'state' within the 'capacity'
that attends it, e.g. by defining 'good temper' as the 'control of
anger', and 'courage' and 'justice' as 'control of fears' and of 'gains':
for the terms 'courageous' and 'good-tempered' are applied to a man
who is immune from passion, whereas 'self-controlled' describes the
man who is exposed to passion and not led by it. Quite possibly, indeed,
each of the former is attended by a capacity such that, if he were
exposed to passion, he would control it and not be led by it: but,
for all that, this is not what is meant by being 'courageous' in the
one case, and 'good tempered' in the other; what is meant is an absolute
immunity from any passions of that kind at all. 

Sometimes, also, people state any kind of attendant feature as the
genus, e.g. 'pain' as the genus of 'anger' and 'conception' as that
of conviction'. For both of the things in question follow in a certain
sense upon the given species, but neither of them is genus to it.
For when the angry man feels pain, the pain bas appeared in him earlier
than the anger: for his anger is not the cause of his pain, but his
pain of his anger, so that anger emphatically is not pain. By the
same reasoning, neither is conviction conception: for it is possible
to have the same conception even without being convinced of it, whereas
this is impossible if conviction be a species of conception: for it
is impossible for a thing still to remain the same if it be entirely
transferred out of its species, just as neither could the same animal
at one time be, and at another not be, a man. If, on the other hand,
any one says that a man who has a conception must of necessity be
also convinced of it, then 'conception' and 'conviction' will be used
with an equal denotation, so that not even so could the former be
the genus of the latter: for the denotation of the genus should be
wider. 

See, also, whether both naturally come to be anywhere in the same
thing: for what contains the species contains the genus as well: e.g.
what contains 'white' contains 'colour' as well, and what contains
'knowledge of grammar' contains 'knowledge' as well. If, therefore,
any one says that 'shame' is 'fear', or that 'anger' is 'pain', the
result will be that genus and species are not found in the same thing:
for shame is found in the 'reasoning' faculty, whereas fear is in
the 'spirited' faculty, and 'pain' is found in the faculty of 'desires'.
(for in this pleasure also is found), whereas 'anger' is found in
the 'spirited' faculty. Hence the terms rendered are not the genera,
seeing that they do not naturally come to be in the same faculty as
the species. Likewise, also, if 'friendship' be found in the faculty
of desires, you may take it that it is not a form of 'wishing': for
wishing is always found in the 'reasoning' faculty. This commonplace
rule is useful also in dealing with Accident: for the accident and
that of which it is an accident are both found in the same thing,
so that if they do not appear in the same thing, clearly it is not
an accident. 

Again, see if the species partakes of the genus attributed only in
some particular respect: for it is the general view that the genus
is not thus imparted only in some particular respect: for a man is
not an animal in a particular respect, nor is grammar knowledge in
a particular respect only. Likewise also in other instances. Look,
therefore, and see if in the case of any of its species the genus
be imparted only in a certain respect; e.g. if 'animal' has been described
as an 'object of perception' or of 'sight'. For an animal is an object
of perception or of sight in a particular respect only; for it is
in respect of its body that it is perceived and seen, not in respect
of its soul, so that-'object of sight' and 'object of perception'
could not be the genus of 'animal'. 

Sometimes also people place the whole inside the part without detection,
defining (e.g.) 'animal' as an 'animate body'; whereas the part is
not predicated in any sense of the whole, so that 'body' could not
be the genus of animal, seeing that it is a part. 

See also if he has put anything that is blameworthy or objectionable
into the class 'capacity' or 'capable', e.g. by defining a 'sophist'
or a 'slanderer', or a 'thief' as 'one who is capable of secretly
thieving other people's property'. For none of the aforesaid characters
is so called because he is 'capable' in one of these respects: for
even God and the good man are capable of doing bad things, but that
is not their character: for it is always in respect of their choice
that bad men are so called. Moreover, a capacity is always a desirable
thing: for even the capacities for doing bad things are desirable,
and therefore it is we say that even God and the good man possess
them; for they are capable (we say) of doing evil. So then 'capacity'
can never be the genus of anything blameworthy. Else, the result will
be that what is blameworthy is sometimes desirable: for there will
be a certain form of capacity that is blameworthy. 

Also, see if he has put anything that is precious or desirable for
its own sake into the class 'capacity' or 'capable' or 'productive'
of anything. For capacity, and what is capable or productive of anything,
is always desirable for the sake of something else. 

Or see if he has put anything that exists in two genera or more into
one of them only. For some things it is impossible to place in a single
genus, e.g. the 'cheat' and the 'slanderer': for neither he who has
the will without the capacity, nor he who has the capacity without
the will, is a slanderer or cheat, but he who has both of them. Hence
he must be put not into one genus, but into both the aforesaid genera.

Moreover, people sometimes in converse order render genus as differentia,
and differentia as genus, defining (e.g.) astonishment as 'excess
of wonderment' and conviction as 'vehemence of conception'. For neither
'excess' nor 'vehemence' is the genus, but the differentia: for astonishment
is usually taken to be an 'excessive wonderment', and conviction to
be a 'vehement conception', so that 'wonderment' and 'conception'
are the genus, while 'excess' and 'vehemence' are the differentia.
Moreover, if any one renders 'excess' and 'vehemence' as genera, then
inanimate things will be convinced and astonished. For 'vehemence'
and 'excess' of a thing are found in a thing which is thus vehement
and in excess. If, therefore, astonishment be excess of wonderment
the astonishment will be found in the wonderment, so that 'wonderment'
will be astonished! Likewise, also, conviction will be found in the
conception, if it be 'vehemence of conception', so that the conception
will be convinced. Moreover, a man who renders an answer in this style
will in consequence find himself calling vehemence vehement and excess
excessive: for there is such a thing as a vehement conviction: if
then conviction be 'vehemence', there would be a 'vehement vehemence'.
Likewise, also, there is such a thing as excessive astonishment: if
then astonishment be an excess, there would be an 'excessive excess'.
Whereas neither of these things is generally believed, any more than
that knowledge is a knower or motion a moving thing. 

Sometimes, too, people make the bad mistake of putting an affection
into that which is affected, as its genus, e.g. those who say that
immortality is everlasting life: for immortality seems to be a certain
affection or accidental feature of life. That this saying is true
would appear clear if any one were to admit that a man can pass from
being mortal and become immortal: for no one will assert that he takes
another life, but that a certain accidental feature or affection enters
into this one as it is. So then 'life' is not the genus of immortality.

Again, see if to an affection he has ascribed as genus the object
of which it is an affection, by defining (e.g.) wind as 'air in motion'.
Rather, wind is 'a movement of air': for the same air persists both
when it is in motion and when it is still. Hence wind is not 'air'
at all: for then there would also have been wind when the air was
not in motion, seeing that the same air which formed the wind persists.
Likewise, also, in other cases of the kind. Even, then, if we ought
in this instance to admit the point that wind is 'air in motion',
yet we should accept a definition of the kind, not about all those
things of which the genus is not true, but only in cases where the
genus rendered is a true predicate. For in some cases, e.g. 'mud'
or 'snow', it is not generally held to be true. For people tell you
that snow is 'frozen water' and mud is earth mixed with moisture',
whereas snow is not water, nor mud earth, so that neither of the terms
rendered could be the genus: for the genus should be true of all its
species. Likewise neither is wine 'fermented water', as Empedocles
speaks of 'water fermented in wood';' for it simply is not water at
all.
