---
obra_pt: "Tópicos"
obra_en: "Topics"
categoria: 01_organon
obra_slug: 05_topicos
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Pickard-Cambridge
livro_num: 5
livro_marker: "BOOK V"
total_livros: 8
capitulo_num: 4
capitulo_marker: "Part 4"
total_capitulos_no_livro: 8
bytes: 10896
chars_aprox: 10896
---

The inquiry, then, whether the property has been correctly rendered
or no, should be made by these means. The question, on the other hand,
whether what is stated is or is not a property at all, you should
examine from the following points of view. For the commonplace arguments
which establish absolutely that the property is accurately stated
will be the same as those that constitute it a property at all: accordingly
they will be described in the course of them. 

Firstly, then, for destructive purposes, take a look at each subject
of which he has rendered the property, and see (e.g.) if it fails
to belong to any of them at all, or to be true of them in that particular
respect, or to be a property of each of them in respect of that character
of which he has rendered the property: for then what is stated to
be a property will not be a property. Thus, for example, inasmuch
as it is not true of the geometrician that he 'cannot be deceived
by an argument' (for a geometrician is deceived when his figure is
misdrawn), it could not be a property of the man of science that he
is not deceived by an argument. For constructive purposes, on the
other hand, see whether the property rendered be true of every instance,
and true in that particular respect: for then what is stated not to
be a property will be a property. Thus, for example, in as much as
the description 'an animal capable of receiving knowledge' is true
of every man, and true of him qua man, it would be a property of man
to be 'an animal capable of receiving knowledge'. commonplace rule
means-for destructive purposes, see if the description fails to be
true of that of which the name is true; and if the name fails to be
true of that of which the description is true: for constructive purposes,
on the other hand, see if the description too is predicated of that
of which the name is predicated, and if the name too is predicated
of that of which the description is predicated.] 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if the description fails to apply
to that to which the name applies, and if the name fails to apply
to that to which the description applies: for then what is stated
to be a property will not be a property. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as the
description 'a living being that partakes of knowledge' is true of
God, while 'man' is not predicated of God, to be a living being that
partakes of knowledge' could not be a property of man. For constructive
purposes, on the other hand, see if the name as well be predicated
of that of which the description is predicated, and if the description
as well be predicated of that of which the name is predicated. For
then what is stated not to be a property will be a property. Thus
(e.g.) the predicate 'living creature' is true of that of which 'having
a soul' is true, and 'having a soul' is true of that of which the
predicate 'living creature' is true; and so 'having a soul would be
a property of 'living creature'. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if he has rendered a subject as
a property of that which is described as 'in the subject': for then
what has been stated to be a property will not be a property. Thus
(e.g.) inasmuch as he who has rendered 'fire' as the property of 'the
body with the most rarefied particles', has rendered the subject as
the property of its predicate, 'fire' could not be a property of 'the
body with the most rarefied particles'. The reason why the subject
will not be a property of that which is found in the subject is this,
that then the same thing will be the property of a number of things
that are specifically different. For the same thing has quite a number
of specifically different predicates that belong to it alone, and
the subject will be a property of all of these, if any one states
the property in this way. For constructive purposes, on the other
hand, see if he has rendered what is found in the subject as a property
of the subject: for then what has been stated not to be a property
will be a property, if it be predicated only of the things of which
it has been stated to be the property. Thus (e.g.) he who has said
that it is a property of 'earth' to be 'specifically the heaviest
body' has rendered of the subject as its property something that is
said of the thing in question alone, and is said of it in the manner
in which a property is predicated, and so the property of earth would
have been rightly stated. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if he has rendered the property
as partaken of: for then what is stated to be a property will not
be a property. For an attribute of which the subject partakes is a
constituent part of its essence: and an attribute of that kind would
be a differentia applying to some one species. E.g. inasmuch as he
who has said that 'walking on two feet' is property of man has rendered
the property as partaken of, 'walking on two feet' could not be a
property of 'man'. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see
if he has avoided rendering the property as partaken of, or as showing
the essence, though the subject is predicated convertibly with it:
for then what is stated not to be a property will be a property. Thus
(e.g.) he who has stated that to be 'naturally sentient' is a property
of 'animal' has rendered the property neither as partaken of nor as
showing the essence, though the subject is predicated convertibly
with it; and so to be 'naturally sentient' would be a property of
'animal'. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if the property cannot possibly
belong simultaneously, but must belong either as posterior or as prior
to the attribute described in the name: for then what is stated to
be a property will not be a property either never, or not always.
Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as it is possible for the attribute 'walking
through the market-place' to belong to an object as prior and as posterior
to the attribute 'man', 'walking through the market-place' could not
be a property of 'man' either never, or not always. For constructive
purposes, on the other hand, see if it always and of necessity belongs
simultaneously, without being either a definition or a differentia:
for then what is stated not to be a property will be a property. Thus
(e.g.) the attribute 'an animal capable of receiving knowledge' always
and of necessity belongs simultaneously with the attribute 'man',
and is neither differentia nor definition of its subject, and so 'an
animal capable of receiving knowledge' would be a property of 'man'.

Next, for destructive purposes, see if the same thing fails to be
a property of things that are the same as the subject, so far as they
are the same: for then what is stated to be a property will not be
a property. Thus, for example, inasmuch as it is no property of a
'proper object of pursuit' to 'appear good to certain persons', it
could not be a property of the 'desirable' either to 'appear good
to certain persons': for 'proper object of pursuit' and 'desirable'
mean the same. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if
the same thing be a property of something that is the same as the
subject, in so far as it is the same. For then is stated not to be
a property will be a property. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as it is called
a property of a man, in so far as he is a man, 'to have a tripartite
soul', it would also be a property of a mortal, in so far as he is
a mortal, to have a tripartite soul. This commonplace rule is useful
also in dealing with Accident: for the same attributes ought either
to belong or not belong to the same things, in so far as they are
the same. 

Next, for destructive purposes, see if the property of things that
are the same in kind as the subject fails to be always the same in
kind as the alleged property: for then neither will what is stated
to be the property of the subject in question. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch
as a man and a horse are the same in kind, and it is not always a
property of a horse to stand by its own initiative, it could not be
a property of a man to move by his own initiative; for to stand and
to move by his own initiative are the same in kind, because they belong
to each of them in so far as each is an 'animal'. For constructive
purposes, on the other hand, see if of things that are the same in
kind as the subject the property that is the same as the alleged property
is always true: for then what is stated not to be a property will
be a property. Thus (e.g.) since it is a property of man to be a 'walking
biped,' it would also be a property of a bird to be a 'flying biped':
for each of these is the same in kind, in so far as the one pair have
the sameness of species that fall under the same genus, being under
the genus 'animal', while the other pair have that of differentiae
of the genus, viz. of 'animal'. This commonplace rule is deceptive
whenever one of the properties mentioned belongs to some one species
only while the other belongs to many, as does 'walking quadruped'.

Inasmuch as 'same' and 'different' are terms used in several senses,
it is a job to render to a sophistical questioner a property that
belongs to one thing and that only. For an attribute that belongs
to something qualified by an accident will also belong to the accident
taken along with the subject which it qualifies; e.g. an attribute
that belongs to 'man' will belong also to 'white man', if there be
a white man, and one that belongs to 'white man' will belong also
to 'man'. One might, then, bring captious criticism against the majority
of properties, by representing the subject as being one thing in itself,
and another thing when combined with its accident, saying, for example,
that 'man' is one thing, and white man' another, and moreover by representing
as different a certain state and what is called after that state.
For an attribute that belongs to the state will belong also to what
is called after that state, and one that belongs to what is called
after a state will belong also to the state: e.g. inasmuch as the
condition of the scientist is called after his science, it could not
be a property of 'science' that it is 'incontrovertible by argument';
for then the scientist also will be incontrovertible by argument.
For constructive purposes, however, you should say that the subject
of an accident is not absolutely different from the accident taken
along with its subject; though it is called 'another' thing because
the mode of being of the two is different: for it is not the same
thing for a man to be a man and for a white man to be a white man.
Moreover, you should take a look along at the inflections, and say
that the description of the man of science is wrong: one should say
not 'it' but 'he is incontrovertible by argument'; while the description
of Science is wrong too: one should say not 'it' but 'she is incontrovertible
by argument'. For against an objector who sticks at nothing the defence
should stick at nothing.
