---
obra_pt: "Tópicos"
obra_en: "Topics"
categoria: 01_organon
obra_slug: 05_topicos
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Pickard-Cambridge
livro_num: 6
livro_marker: "BOOK VI"
total_livros: 8
capitulo_num: 4
capitulo_marker: "Part 4"
total_capitulos_no_livro: 14
bytes: 8290
chars_aprox: 8290
---

Whether, then, a man defines a thing correctly or incorrectly you
should proceed to examine on these and similar lines. But whether
he has mentioned and defined its essence or no, should be examined
as follows: First of all, see if he has failed to make the definition
through terms that are prior and more intelligible. For the reason
why the definition is rendered is to make known the term stated, and
we make things known by taking not any random terms, but such as are
prior and more intelligible, as is done in demonstrations (for so
it is with all teaching and learning); accordingly, it is clear that
a man who does not define through terms of this kind has not defined
at all. Otherwise, there will be more than one definition of the same
thing: for clearly he who defines through terms that are prior and
more intelligible has also framed a definition, and a better one,
so that both would then be definitions of the same object. This sort
of view, however, does not generally find acceptance: for of each
real object the essence is single: if, then, there are to be a number
of definitions of the same thing, the essence of the object will be
the same as it is represented to be in each of the definitions, and
these representations are not the same, inasmuch as the definitions
are different. Clearly, then, any one who has not defined a thing
through terms that are prior and more intelligible has not defined
it at all. 

The statement that a definition has not been made through more intelligible
terms may be understood in two senses, either supposing that its terms
are absolutely less intelligible, or supposing that they are less
intelligible to us: for either sense is possible. Thus absolutely
the prior is more intelligible than the posterior, a point, for instance,
than a line, a line than a plane, and a plane than a solid; just as
also a unit is more intelligible than a number; for it is the prius
and starting-point of all number. Likewise, also, a letter is more
intelligible than a syllable. Whereas to us it sometimes happens that
the converse is the case: for the solid falls under perception most
of all-more than a plane-and a plane more than a line, and a line
more than a point; for most people learn things like the former earlier
than the latter; for any ordinary intelligence can grasp them, whereas
the others require an exact and exceptional understanding.

Absolutely, then, it is better to try to make what is posterior known
through what is prior, inasmuch as such a way of procedure is more
scientific. Of course, in dealing with persons who cannot recognize
things through terms of that kind, it may perhaps be necessary to
frame the expression through terms that are intelligible to them.
Among definitions of this kind are those of a point, a line, and a
plane, all of which explain the prior by the posterior; for they say
that a point is the limit of a line, a line of a plane, a plane of
a solid. One must, however, not fail to observe that those who define
in this way cannot show the essential nature of the term they define,
unless it so happens that the same thing is more intelligible both
to us and also absolutely, since a correct definition must define
a thing through its genus and its differentiae, and these belong to
the order of things which are absolutely more intelligible than, and
prior to, the species. For annul the genus and differentia, and the
species too is annulled, so that these are prior to the species. They
are also more intelligible; for if the species be known, the genus
and differentia must of necessity be known as well (for any one who
knows what a man is knows also what 'animal' and 'walking' are), whereas
if the genus or the differentia be known it does not follow of necessity
that the species is known as well: thus the species is less intelligible.
Moreover, those who say that such definitions, viz. those which proceed
from what is intelligible to this, that, or the other man, are really
and truly definitions, will have to say that there are several definitions
of one and the same thing. For, as it happens, different things are
more intelligible to different people, not the same things to all;
and so a different definition would have to be rendered to each several
person, if the definition is to be constructed from what is more intelligible
to particular individuals. Moreover, to the same people different
things are more intelligible at different times; first of all the
objects of sense; then, as they become more sharpwitted, the converse;
so that those who hold that a definition ought to be rendered through
what is more intelligible to particular individuals would not have
to render the same definition at all times even to the same person.
It is clear, then, that the right way to define is not through terms
of that kind, but through what is absolutely more intelligible: for
only in this way could the definition come always to be one and the
same. Perhaps, also, what is absolutely intelligible is what is intelligible,
not to all, but to those who are in a sound state of understanding,
just as what is absolutely healthy is what is healthy to those in
a sound state of body. All such points as this ought to be made very
precise, and made use of in the course of discussion as occasion requires.
The demolition of a definition will most surely win a general approval
if the definer happens to have framed his expression neither from
what is absolutely more intelligible nor yet from what is so to us.

One form, then, of the failure to work through more intelligible terms
is the exhibition of the prior through the posterior, as we remarked
before.' Another form occurs if we find that the definition has been
rendered of what is at rest and definite through what is indefinite
and in motion: for what is still and definite is prior to what is
indefinite and in motion. 

Of the failure to use terms that are prior there are three forms:

(1) The first is when an opposite has been defined through its opposite,
e.g.i. good through evil: for opposites are always simultaneous by
nature. Some people think, also, that both are objects of the same
science, so that the one is not even more intelligible than the other.
One must, however, observe that it is perhaps not possible to define
some things in any other way, e.g. the double without the half, and
all the terms that are essentially relative: for in all such cases
the essential being is the same as a certain relation to something,
so that it is impossible to understand the one term without the other,
and accordingly in the definition of the one the other too must be
embraced. One ought to learn up all such points as these, and use
them as occasion may seem to require. 

(2) Another is-if he has used the term defined itself. This passes
unobserved when the actual name of the object is not used, e.g. supposing
any one had defined the sun as a star that appears by day'. For in
bringing in 'day' he brings in the sun. To detect errors of this sort,
exchange the word for its definition, e.g. the definition of 'day'
as the 'passage of the sun over the earth'. Clearly, whoever has said
'the passage of the sun over the earth' has said 'the sun', so that
in bringing in the 'day' he has brought in the sun. 

(3) Again, see if he has defined one coordinate member of a division
by another, e.g. 'an odd number' as 'that which is greater by one
than an even number'. For the co-ordinate members of a division that
are derived from the same genus are simultaneous by nature and 'odd'
and 'even' are such terms: for both are differentiae of number.

Likewise also, see if he has defined a superior through a subordinate
term, e.g. 'An "even number" is "a number divisible into halves"',
or '"the good" is a "state of virtue" '. For 'half' is derived from
'two', and 'two' is an even number: virtue also is a kind of good,
so that the latter terms are subordinate to the former. Moreover,
in using the subordinate term one is bound to use the other as well:
for whoever employs the term 'virtue' employs the term 'good', seeing
that virtue is a certain kind of good: likewise, also, whoever employs
the term 'half' employs the term 'even', for to be 'divided in half'
means to be divided into two, and two is even.
