---
cena_id: 03_psicologia_biologia/07_geracao_animais/L01-C01_cena15
obra_pt: "Sobre a Geração dos Animais"
obra_en: "On the Generation of Animals"
categoria: 03_psicologia_biologia
obra_slug: 07_geracao_animais
fonte: Archive.org/Loeb-Peck
livro_num: 1
livro_marker: "BOOK I"
capitulo_num: 1
capitulo_marker: "BOOK I (sem CHAPTER)"
sub_cena_num: 15
sub_cena_total: 29
audio_in_obra_idx: 15
audio_in_obra_total: 140
chars: 6972
---

‘unless the substance that is added changes? If how- 
ever it is admitted that this added substance can 
change, why not admit straight away that the semen 
at the outset is such that out of it blood and flesh can 
be formed, instead of maintaining that the semen is 
itself both blood and flesh ? They might try to argue 
that jt grows at a later stage by admixture; just as 
wine is increased in bulk by pouring in water; but 
even this line of argument proves impossible, because 
if that were so, then it would surely be at the outset 
that each of the parts was its own proper self, before 
it was mixed, whereas in actual fact it is at a later 
stage that this occurs (I refer of course to flesh and 
bone and every one of the rest of them). And the 
assertion that some of the semen is sinew and bone 
is quite beyond us, as the saying goes. 

Here is another objection. Suppose it is true that 
the differentiation between male and female takes 
place during conception, as Empedocles says * : 

Into clean vessels were they pouréd forth ; 
Some spring up to be women, if so be 
They meet with cold... . 

Anyway, both men and women are observed to 
change: not only do the infertile become fertile, 
but also those who have borne females bear males ; 
which suggests that the cause is not that the semen 
is or is not drawn from the whole of the parents, but 
depends upon whether or not that which is drawn 
from the man and from the woman stand in the right 
proportional relation to each other.® Or else it is 
due to some other cause of this sort. Thus, if we are 
to assume this as true, viz., that the same semen is 

> Cf. 767 a 16, 772'a 17, and Introd. § 39.. 
D 65 

723 a 

723 b 

(ARISTOTLE | (PAS 499 

ovde TO Hépos 6 exeu tWuov 6 TE dppev Kat To O7Av, 
elmep TO avTO ome pha. Kal Orv Kal dppev dvvarat 

35 yiyveoBan ws ovK ovros TOU jeopion + ev TQ onéppart. 

Tt ovv Suapeper € emt Tovrou eye 7 i) emt TOV Mov 
popieo ; a yap pnd? dro Tis borépas. onépp.a. 
yiverat, 6 adtos Adyos Kal émi TOV on Dan @ el 
Hopiwv. on si 
"Eru eva yiverar Tov farm our’ » sbi dieaty di 
ovTe TH yever Siahodpwv, ofov at pviar Kat Ta yevn 

5 Tv kadovjieverr puaray. ex 5é Tovrwr yiveran 

prev CHa, odKére 5° opowa THY poow, aNd. yevos Tt 
oKwAnieny. d7Aov_odv ore ovK amo mayros Mépous 
daridvTos yiyvovras oo. eTEpOyevi}’ Spowa yap, dy 
7s elmep Tob amo TavTos amevat onyetov eoTW %} 
Opmovorns. i 
"Eru amd puds ovvovolas Kal tov Cdwv ena 

10 yevva ToAAd, Ta Se duTa Kal mavTamacw: SHAov 

yap OTL amd pds Kwhoews TOV eméTeLoy TavTa 
déper kaproév. Kaito. mHs Svvardv, ei amo TavTos 
amekpiveTo TO oméppa; pilav yap amdoKpiow amo 
puds avayKatov yiveobar cuvovatas Kal pds SvaKkpi- 
cews. ev d€ Tats daTépats xwpilectar aovvaTtov" 

1 yYodav Em, Aldus, Buss.; A.-W. ‘Platt: pwrav SZ + on 
vulg.; cf. 721 a8 supra. 

« And that the differentiation takes place in the uterus. 

> This does not of course imply a belief in plant fertiliza- 

tion; but the precise meaning of the remark is not clear. 
On comparison with 728 b 35 ff., it appears that the product 
of the ‘‘ one act of coition ” in "animals corresponds to the 
“ seed ” of plants, which also is a ‘‘ fetation,” in which male 
and female are not separate, just as male and female are 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xvin. 

able to be formed into either male or female 4% (imply- 
ing that the sexual part is not present in the semen), 
it is clear that it is not the semen’s being drawn from 
some one part which causes the offspring to be female, 
nor, in consequence, is it responsible for the special 
physical part which is peculiar to the two sexes. 
And what can be asserted about the sexual part 
can equally well be asserted about the other parts ; 
since if no-semen comes even from the uterus, the 
same willsurely hold good. of the other parts as well. 
Further, some animals are formed neither from 
ereatures of the same kind as themselves nor from 
creatures of a different kind ;, examples are: flies 
and the various kinds of fleas as they are called. 
Animals are formed from these, it is true, but in these 
eases they are not similar in character to their 
parents ; instead we get a class of larvae. Thus in 
these creatures which differ in kind from their parents 
we clearly have animals which are not formed out of 
semen drawn from every part of the body, for if 
resemblance is held to be a sure sign that this has 
occurred, then they would resemble their parents. 
Further, even among the animals there are some 
which generate numerous offspring from one act of 
coition, a phenomenon which is, indeed, universal 
with plants ; these, as is manifest, produce a whole 
season’s fruit as the result of one single movement.? 
Now how is this possible on the supposition that the 
semen is secreted from the whole body? One act of 
coition, and one effort of segregation, ought neces- 
sarily to give rise to one secretion and no more. That 
it should get divided up in the uterus is impossible, 

combined in the “ fetation ” ofan animal. See also 728 a 27, 
7ilal. 

P ARISTOTLE!) 7 A504 90 

723 b 

15 707 yap domep amo véov dutod 7 Show: wi cri 
[LaTOS ety’ H Staxeprots. 

"Ere 7a amogpurevdjieva a dm abrod déper ore ppc." 
dmpov obv oT. Kal amply arropurev Ova amo 708 
avTod peyeBous" epepe TOV KapTov, Kat ovK dao 
qTavTos Tob duTod aarnet TO omepy.a.. 

Meyworov de rovray TEK EMPLOY reBewoprixapey 

20 ixav@s emi ta&v evrépwv. Kal yap et pr) ev maow, 
adn’ emi tOv mrclotwv ev TH oxela TO Of Ay cis TO 

appev puépos Tt adrToo azroretver [8x0 Kal THV dxelav, 

Kabldmep elmopev mporepov, ovUTW ToLobvTaL|** Ta 
yap Katwhev eis Ta avw dhalverar evadievta, odK 
ev maow, add’ év tots mAcioros TOV. TeVewpy- 
/ @ ‘ n ww hid 299 & he , 
25 PEVWV. WOTE davepov av €ty) OTL ovd 000 TpoLleTat 
yoviy T&v appevwv, od TO Amo TaVvTOS amlevat TIS 
/ ” / 2 > > » SX yes rat 
yevéoews aitidv eotw, add’ aAdAov twa TpdToV, 
mept ob oKerréov Vorepov. Kal yap eimep TO A710 
LA 

mavTos amrLevat ovveBawvev, worep pact, ovbev 
ede amo mavTwV dgvoby dmeva, adAd pdvov amo 
30 To0 Snuoupyodvros, olov dad tod TékTovos GAAd 

~ ~. 4 
fq) Gro THs UAns. vov 8 dpovov Aéyovow. womep 

~ o¢ 

Kav et amo THv drodnpdtwv: axeddov yap 6 djovos* 
vios TH TaTpl Guowa dopet. ite 

> a ¢ / 
"Or. 8 7S0v7) ofodpa yiverau ev TH dmiAta TH 

1 dnd. . . etn) awd Chou oréppa rovet Z, sim. E. 
2 wépovs coni. Bonitz. 3 seclusi: om. X. | 

4 6 dpoos P : duos tus Vulg.: dpotos Z. 

* The text is probably corrupt; for the sense ef. 729 a 6 ff. 
> Ch. 16. 

es 

GENERATION OF ANIMALS, I. xvnt. 

for by that time the division would be made as it were 
from a new plant or animal, not of semen.* 

Further, transplanted cuttings bear seed—derived, 
of course, from themselves; which is proof positive 
that the fruit they bore before they were trans- 
planted was derived from that identical amount of 
the plant which is now the cutting, and that the 
seed was not drawn from the whole of the plant.
