---
cena_id: 03_psicologia_biologia/04_partes_animais/L03-C04_cena01
obra_pt: "Sobre as Partes dos Animais"
obra_en: "On the Parts of Animals"
categoria: 03_psicologia_biologia
obra_slug: 04_partes_animais
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Ogle
livro_num: 3
livro_marker: "BOOK III"
capitulo_num: 4
capitulo_marker: "Part 4"
sub_cena_num: 1
sub_cena_total: 2
audio_in_obra_idx: 29
audio_in_obra_total: 62
chars: 6985
---

We have now dealt with the neck, the oesophagus, and the windpipe,
and have next to treat of the viscera. These are peculiar to sanguineous
animals, some of which have all of them, others only a part, while
no bloodless animals have any at all. Democritus then seems to have
been mistaken in the notion he formed of the viscera, if, that is
to say, he fancied that the reason why none were discoverable in bloodless
animals was that these animals were too small to allow them to be
seen. For, in sanguineous animals, both heart and liver are visible
enough when the body is only just formed, and while it is still extremely
small. For these parts are to be seen in the egg sometimes as early
as the third day, being then no bigger than a point; and are visible
also in aborted embryos, while still excessively minute. Moreover,
as the external organs are not precisely alike in all animals, but
each creature is provided with such as are suited to its special mode
of life and motion, so is it with the internal parts, these also differing
in different animals. Viscera, then, are peculiar to sanguineous animals;
and therefore are each and all formed from sanguineous material, as
is plainly to be seen in the new-born young of these animals. For
in such the viscera are more sanguineous, and of greater bulk in proportion
to the body, than at any later period of life, it being in the earliest
stage of formation that the nature of the material and its abundance
are most conspicuous. There is a heart, then, in all sanguineous animals,
and the reason for this has already been given. For that sanguineous
animals must necessarily have blood is self-evident. And, as the blood
is fluid, it is also a matter of necessity that there shall be a receptacle
for it; and it is apparently to meet this requirement that nature
has devised the blood-vessels. These, again, must necessarily have
one primary source. For it is preferable that there shall be one such,
when possible, rather than several. This primary source of the vessels
is the heart. For the vessels manifestly issue from it and do not
go through it. Moreover, being as it is homogeneous, it has the character
of a blood-vessel. Again its position is that of a primary or dominating
part. For nature, when no other more important purpose stands in her
way, places the more honourable part in the more honourable position;
and the heart lies about the centre of the body, but rather in its
upper than its lower half, and also more in front than behind. This
is most evident in the case of man, but even in other animals there
is a tendency in the heart to assume a similar position, in the centre
of the necessary part of the body, that is to say of the part which
terminates in the vent for excrement. For the limbs vary in position
in different animals, and are not to be counted with the parts which
are necessary for life. For life can be maintained even when they
are removed; while it is self-evident that the addition of them to
an animal is not destructive of it. 

There are some who say that the vessels commence in the head. In this
they are clearly mistaken. For in the first place, according to their
representation, there would be many sources for the vessels, and these
scattered; and secondly, these sources would be in a region that is
manifestly cold, as is shown by its intolerance of chill, whereas
the region of the heart is as manifestly hot. Again, as already said,
the vessels continue their course through the other viscera, but no
vessel spreads through the heart. From this it is quite evident that
the heart is a part of the vessels and their origin; and for this
it is well suited by its structure. For its central part consists
of a dense and hollow substance, and is moreover full of blood, as
though the vessels took thence their origin. It is hollow to serve
for the reception of the blood, while its wall is dense, that it may
serve to protect the source of heat. For here, and here alone in all
the viscera and indeed in all the body, there is blood without blood-vessels,
the blood elsewhere being always contained within vessels. Nor is
this but consistent with reason. For the blood is conveyed into the
vessels from the heart, but none passes into the heart from without.
For in itself it constitutes the origin and fountain, or primary receptacle,
of the blood. It is however, from dissections and from observations
on the process of development that the truth of these statements receives
its clearest demonstration. For the heart is the first of all the
parts to be formed; and no sooner is it formed than it contains blood.
Moreover, the motions of pain and pleasure, and generally of all sensation,
plainly have their source in the heart, and find in it their ultimate
termination. This, indeed, reason would lead us to expect. For the
source must, when. ever possible, be one; and, of all places, the
best suited for a source is the centre. For the centre is one, and
is equally or almost equally within reach of every part. Again, as
neither the blood itself, nor yet any part which is bloodless, is
endowed with sensation, it is plain that that part which first has
blood, and which holds it as it were in a receptacle, must be the
primary source of sensation. And that this part is the heart is not
only a rational inference, but also evident to the senses. For no
sooner is the embryo formed, than its heart is seen in motion as though
it were a living creature, and this before any of the other parts,
it being, as thus shown, the starting-point of their nature in all
animals that have blood. A further evidence of the truth of what has
been stated is the fact that no sanguineous animal is without a heart.
For the primary source of blood must of necessity be present in them
all. It is true that sanguineous animals not only have a heart but
also invariably have a liver. But no one could ever deem the liver
to be the primary organ either of the whole body or of the blood.
For the position in which it is placed is far from being that of a
primary or dominating part; and, moreover, in the most perfectly finished
animals there is another part, the spleen, which as it were counterbalances
it. Still further, the liver contains no spacious receptacle in its
substance, as does the heart; but its blood is in a vessel as in all
the other viscera. The vessel, moreover, extends through it, and no
vessel whatsoever originates in it; for it is from the heart that
all the vessels take their rise. Since then one or other of these
two parts must be the central source, and since it is not the liver
which is such, it follows of necessity that it is the heart which
is the source of the blood, as also the primary organ in other respects.
For the definitive characteristic of an animal is the possession of
sensation; and the first sensory part is that which first has blood;
that is to say is the heart, which is the source of blood and the
first of the parts to contain it.
