---
cena_id: 03_psicologia_biologia/04_partes_animais/L04-C06_cena01
obra_pt: "Sobre as Partes dos Animais"
obra_en: "On the Parts of Animals"
categoria: 03_psicologia_biologia
obra_slug: 04_partes_animais
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Ogle
livro_num: 4
livro_marker: "BOOK IV"
capitulo_num: 6
capitulo_marker: "Part 6"
sub_cena_num: 1
sub_cena_total: 1
audio_in_obra_idx: 50
audio_in_obra_total: 62
chars: 6748
---

We will begin with Insects. These animals, though they present no
great multiplicity of parts, are not without diversities when compared
with each other. They are all manyfooted; the object of this being
to compensate their natural slowness and frigidity, and give greater
activity to their motions. Accordingly we find that those which, as
the (Millipedes), have long bodies, and are therefore the most liable
to refrigeration, have also the greatest number of feet. Again, the
body in these animals is insected-the reason for this being that they
have not got one vital centre but many-and the number of their feet
corresponds to that of the insections. 

Should the feet fall short of this, their deficiency is compensated
by the power of flight. Of such flying insects some live a wandering
life, and are forced to make long expeditions in search of food. These
have a body of light weight, and four feathers, two on either side,
to support it. Such are bees and the insects akin to them. When, however,
such insects are of very small bulk, their feathers are reduced to
two, as is the case with flies. Insects with heavy bodies and of stationary
habits, though not polypterous in the same way as bees, yet have sheaths
to their feathers to maintain their efficiency. Such are the Melolonthae
and the like. For their stationary habits expose their feathers to
much greater risks than are run by those of insects that are more
constantly in flight, and on this account they are provided with this
protecting shield. The feather of an insect has neither barbs nor
shaft. For, though it is called a feather, it is no feather at all,
but merely a skin-like membrane that, owing to its dryness, necessarily
becomes detached from the surface of the body, as the fleshy substance
grows cold. 

These animals then have their bodies insected, not only for the reasons
already assigned, but also to enable them to curl round in such a
manner as may protect them from injury; for such insects as have long
bodies can roll themselves up, which would be impossible were it not
for the insections; and those that cannot do this can yet draw their
segments up into the insected spaces, and so increase the hardness
of their bodies. This can be felt quite plainly by putting the finger
on one of the insects, for instance, known as Canthari. The touch
frightens the insect, and it remains motionless, while its body becomes
hard. The division of the body into segments is also a necessary result
of there being several supreme organs in place of one; and this again
is a part of the essential constitution of insects, and is a character
which approximates them to plants. For as plants, though cut into
pieces, can still live, so also can insects. There is, however, this
difference between the two cases, that the portions of the divided
insect live only for a limited time, whereas the portions of the plant
live on and attain the perfect form of the whole, so that from one
single plant you may obtain two or more. 

Some insects are also provided with another means of protection against
their enemies, namely a sting. In some this is in front, connected
with the tongue, in others behind at the posterior end. For just as
the organ of smell in elephants answers several uses, serving alike
as a weapon and for purposes of nutrition, so does also the sting,
when placed in connexion with the tongue, as in some insects, answer
more than one end. For it is the instrument through which they derive
their sensations of food, as well as that with which they suck it
up and bring it to the mouth. Such of these insects as have no anterior
sting are provided with teeth, which serve in some of them for biting
the food, and in others for its prehension and conveyance to the mouth.
Such are their uses, for instance, in ants and all the various kinds
of bees. As for the insects that have a sting behind, this weapon
is given them because they are of a fierce disposition. In some of
them the sting is lodged inside the body, in bees, for example, and
wasps. For these insects are made for flight, and were their sting
external and of delicate make it would soon get spoiled; and if, on
the other hand, it were of thicker build, as in scorpions, its weight
would be an incumbrance. As for scorpions that live on the ground
and have a tail, their sting must be set upon this, as otherwise it
would be of no use as a weapon. Dipterous insects never have a posterior
sting. For the very reason of their being dipterous is that they are
small and weak, and therefore require no more than two feathers to
support their light weight; and the same reason which reduces their
feathers to two causes their sting to be in front; for their strength
is not sufficient to allow them to strike efficiently with the hinder
part of the body. Polypterous insects, on the other hand, are of greater
bulk-indeed it is this which causes them to have so many feathers;
and their greater size makes them stronger in their hinder parts.
The sting of such insects is therefore placed behind. Now it is better,
when possible, that one and the same instrument shall not be made
to serve several dissimilar uses; but that there shall be one organ
to serve as a weapon, which can then be very sharp, and a distinct
one to serve as a tongue, which can then be of spongy texture and
fit to absorb nutriment. Whenever, therefore, nature is able to provide
two separate instruments for two separate uses, without the one hampering
the other, she does so, instead of acting like a coppersmith who for
cheapness makes a spit and lampholder in one. It is only when this
is impossible that she uses one organ for several functions.

The anterior legs are in some cases longer than the others, that they
may serve to wipe away any foreign matter that may lodge on the insect's
eyes and obstruct its sight, which already is not very distinct owing
to the eyes being made of a hard substance. Flies and bees and the
like may be constantly seen thus dressing themselves with crossed
forelegs. Of the other legs, the hinder are bigger than the middle
pair, both to aid in running and also that the insect, when it takes
flight, may spring more easily from the ground. This difference is
still more marked in such insects as leap, in locusts for instance,
and in the various kinds of fleas. For these first bend and then extend
the legs, and, by doing so, are necessarily shot up from the ground.
It is only the. hind legs of locusts, and not the front ones, that
resemble the steering oars of a ship. For this requires that the joint
shall be deflected inwards, and such is never the case with the anterior
limbs. The whole number of legs, including those used in leaping,
is six in all these insects.
