---
cena_id: 04_metafisica/01_metafisica/L04-C04_cena01
obra_pt: "Metafísica"
obra_en: "Metaphysics"
categoria: 04_metafisica
obra_slug: 01_metafisica
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Ross
livro_num: 4
livro_marker: "BOOK IV"
capitulo_num: 4
capitulo_marker: "Part 4"
sub_cena_num: 1
sub_cena_total: 3
audio_in_obra_idx: 25
audio_in_obra_total: 146
chars: 6896
---

"There are some who, as we said, both themselves assert that it is
possible for the same thing to be and not to be, and say that people
can judge this to be the case. And among others many writers about
nature use this language. But we have now posited that it is impossible
for anything at the same time to be and not to be, and by this means
have shown that this is the most indisputable of all principles.-Some
indeed demand that even this shall be demonstrated, but this they
do through want of education, for not to know of what things one should
demand demonstration, and of what one should not, argues want of education.
For it is impossible that there should be demonstration of absolutely
everything (there would be an infinite regress, so that there would
still be no demonstration); but if there are things of which one should
not demand demonstration, these persons could not say what principle
they maintain to be more self-evident than the present one.

"We can, however, demonstrate negatively even that this view is impossible,
if our opponent will only say something; and if he says nothing, it
is absurd to seek to give an account of our views to one who cannot
give an account of anything, in so far as he cannot do so. For such
a man, as such, is from the start no better than a vegetable. Now
negative demonstration I distinguish from demonstration proper, because
in a demonstration one might be thought to be begging the question,
but if another person is responsible for the assumption we shall have
negative proof, not demonstration. The starting-point for all such
arguments is not the demand that our opponent shall say that something
either is or is not (for this one might perhaps take to be a begging
of the question), but that he shall say something which is significant
both for himself and for another; for this is necessary, if he really
is to say anything. For, if he means nothing, such a man will not
be capable of reasoning, either with himself or with another. But
if any one grants this, demonstration will be possible; for we shall
already have something definite. The person responsible for the proof,
however, is not he who demonstrates but he who listens; for while
disowning reason he listens to reason. And again he who admits this
has admitted that something is true apart from demonstration (so that
not everything will be 'so and not so'). 

"First then this at least is obviously true, that the word 'be' or
'not be' has a definite meaning, so that not everything will be 'so
and not so'. Again, if 'man' has one meaning, let this be 'two-footed
animal'; by having one meaning I understand this:-if 'man' means 'X',
then if A is a man 'X' will be what 'being a man' means for him. (It
makes no difference even if one were to say a word has several meanings,
if only they are limited in number; for to each definition there might
be assigned a different word. For instance, we might say that 'man'
has not one meaning but several, one of which would have one definition,
viz. 'two-footed animal', while there might be also several other
definitions if only they were limited in number; for a peculiar name
might be assigned to each of the definitions. If, however, they were
not limited but one were to say that the word has an infinite number
of meanings, obviously reasoning would be impossible; for not to have
one meaning is to have no meaning, and if words have no meaning our
reasoning with one another, and indeed with ourselves, has been annihilated;
for it is impossible to think of anything if we do not think of one
thing; but if this is possible, one name might be assigned to this
thing.) 

"Let it be assumed then, as was said at the beginning, that the name
has a meaning and has one meaning; it is impossible, then, that 'being
a man' should mean precisely 'not being a man', if 'man' not only
signifies something about one subject but also has one significance
(for we do not identify 'having one significance' with 'signifying
something about one subject', since on that assumption even 'musical'
and 'white' and 'man' would have had one significance, so that all
things would have been one; for they would all have had the same significance).

"And it will not be possible to be and not to be the same thing, except
in virtue of an ambiguity, just as if one whom we call 'man', others
were to call 'not-man'; but the point in question is not this, whether
the same thing can at the same time be and not be a man in name, but
whether it can in fact. Now if 'man' and 'not-man' mean nothing different,
obviously 'not being a man' will mean nothing different from 'being
a man'; so that 'being a man' will be 'not being a man'; for they
will be one. For being one means this-being related as 'raiment' and
'dress' are, if their definition is one. And if 'being a man' and
'being a not-man' are to be one, they must mean one thing. But it
was shown earlier' that they mean different things.-Therefore, if
it is true to say of anything that it is a man, it must be a two-footed
animal (for this was what 'man' meant); and if this is necessary,
it is impossible that the same thing should not at that time be a
two-footed animal; for this is what 'being necessary' means-that it
is impossible for the thing not to be. It is, then, impossible that
it should be at the same time true to say the same thing is a man
and is not a man. 

"The same account holds good with regard to 'not being a man', for
'being a man' and 'being a not-man' mean different things, since even
'being white' and 'being a man' are different; for the former terms
are much more different so that they must a fortiori mean different
things. And if any one says that 'white' means one and the same thing
as 'man', again we shall say the same as what was said before, that
it would follow that all things are one, and not only opposites. But
if this is impossible, then what we have maintained will follow, if
our opponent will only answer our question. 

"And if, when one asks the question simply, he adds the contradictories,
he is not answering the question. For there is nothing to prevent
the same thing from being both a man and white and countless other
things: but still, if one asks whether it is or is not true to say
that this is a man, our opponent must give an answer which means one
thing, and not add that 'it is also white and large'. For, besides
other reasons, it is impossible to enumerate its accidental attributes,
which are infinite in number; let him, then, enumerate either all
or none. Similarly, therefore, even if the same thing is a thousand
times a man and a not-man, he must not, in answering the question
whether this is a man, add that it is also at the same time a not-man,
unless he is bound to add also all the other accidents, all that the
subject is or is not; and if he does this, he is not observing the
rules of argument.
