---
cena_id: 04_metafisica/01_metafisica/L04-C04_cena02
obra_pt: "Metafísica"
obra_en: "Metaphysics"
categoria: 04_metafisica
obra_slug: 01_metafisica
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Ross
livro_num: 4
livro_marker: "BOOK IV"
capitulo_num: 4
capitulo_marker: "Part 4"
sub_cena_num: 2
sub_cena_total: 3
audio_in_obra_idx: 26
audio_in_obra_total: 146
chars: 7020
---

"And in general those who say this do away with substance and essence.
For they must say that all attributes are accidents, and that there
is no such thing as 'being essentially a man' or 'an animal'. For
if there is to be any such thing as 'being essentially a man' this
will not be 'being a not-man' or 'not being a man' (yet these are
negations of it); for there was one thing which it meant, and this
was the substance of something. And denoting the substance of a thing
means that the essence of the thing is nothing else. But if its being
essentially a man is to be the same as either being essentially a
not-man or essentially not being a man, then its essence will be something
else. Therefore our opponents must say that there cannot be such a
definition of anything, but that all attributes are accidental; for
this is the distinction between substance and accident-'white' is
accidental to man, because though he is white, whiteness is not his
essence. But if all statements are accidental, there will be nothing
primary about which they are made, if the accidental always implies
predication about a subject. The predication, then, must go on ad
infinitum. But this is impossible; for not even more than two terms
can be combined in accidental predication. For (1) an accident is
not an accident of an accident, unless it be because both are accidents
of the same subject. I mean, for instance, that the white is musical
and the latter is white, only because both are accidental to man.
But (2) Socrates is musical, not in this sense, that both terms are
accidental to something else. Since then some predicates are accidental
in this and some in that sense, (a) those which are accidental in
the latter sense, in which white is accidental to Socrates, cannot
form an infinite series in the upward direction; e.g. Socrates the
white has not yet another accident; for no unity can be got out of
such a sum. Nor again (b) will 'white' have another term accidental
to it, e.g. 'musical'. For this is no more accidental to that than
that is to this; and at the same time we have drawn the distinction,
that while some predicates are accidental in this sense, others are
so in the sense in which 'musical' is accidental to Socrates; and
the accident is an accident of an accident not in cases of the latter
kind, but only in cases of the other kind, so that not all terms will
be accidental. There must, then, even so be something which denotes
substance. And if this is so, it has been shown that contradictories
cannot be predicated at the same time. 

"Again, if all contradictory statements are true of the same subject
at the same time, evidently all things will be one. For the same thing
will be a trireme, a wall, and a man, if of everything it is possible
either to affirm or to deny anything (and this premiss must be accepted
by those who share the views of Protagoras). For if any one thinks
that the man is not a trireme, evidently he is not a trireme; so that
he also is a trireme, if, as they say, contradictory statements are
both true. And we thus get the doctrine of Anaxagoras, that all things
are mixed together; so that nothing really exists. They seem, then,
to be speaking of the indeterminate, and, while fancying themselves
to be speaking of being, they are speaking about non-being; for it
is that which exists potentially and not in complete reality that
is indeterminate. But they must predicate of every subject the affirmation
or the negation of every attribute. For it is absurd if of each subject
its own negation is to be predicable, while the negation of something
else which cannot be predicated of it is not to be predicable of it;
for instance, if it is true to say of a man that he is not a man,
evidently it is also true to say that he is either a trireme or not
a trireme. If, then, the affirmative can be predicated, the negative
must be predicable too; and if the affirmative is not predicable,
the negative, at least, will be more predicable than the negative
of the subject itself. If, then, even the latter negative is predicable,
the negative of 'trireme' will be also predicable; and, if this is
predicable, the affirmative will be so too. 

"Those, then, who maintain this view are driven to this conclusion,
and to the further conclusion that it is not necessary either to assert
or to deny. For if it is true that a thing is a man and a not-man,
evidently also it will be neither a man nor a not-man. For to the
two assertions there answer two negations, and if the former is treated
as a single proposition compounded out of two, the latter also is
a single proposition opposite to the former. 

"Again, either the theory is true in all cases, and a thing is both
white and not-white, and existent and non-existent, and all other
assertions and negations are similarly compatible or the theory is
true of some statements and not of others. And if not of all, the
exceptions will be contradictories of which admittedly only one is
true; but if of all, again either the negation will be true wherever
the assertion is, and the assertion true wherever the negation is,
or the negation will be true where the assertion is, but the assertion
not always true where the negation is. And (a) in the latter case
there will be something which fixedly is not, and this will be an
indisputable belief; and if non-being is something indisputable and
knowable, the opposite assertion will be more knowable. But (b) if
it is equally possible also to assert all that it is possible to deny,
one must either be saying what is true when one separates the predicates
(and says, for instance, that a thing is white, and again that it
is not-white), or not. And if (i) it is not true to apply the predicates
separately, our opponent is not saying what he professes to say, and
also nothing at all exists; but how could non-existent things speak
or walk, as he does? Also all things would on this view be one, as
has been already said, and man and God and trireme and their contradictories
will be the same. For if contradictories can be predicated alike of
each subject, one thing will in no wise differ from another; for if
it differ, this difference will be something true and peculiar to
it. And (ii) if one may with truth apply the predicates separately,
the above-mentioned result follows none the less, and, further, it
follows that all would then be right and all would be in error, and
our opponent himself confesses himself to be in error.-And at the
same time our discussion with him is evidently about nothing at all;
for he says nothing. For he says neither 'yes' nor 'no', but 'yes
and no'; and again he denies both of these and says 'neither yes nor
no'; for otherwise there would already be something definite.

"Again if when the assertion is true, the negation is false, and when
this is true, the affirmation is false, it will not be possible to
assert and deny the same thing truly at the same time. But perhaps
they might say this was the very question at issue.
