---
cena_id: 02_fisica/04_meteorologia/L02-C03_cena02
obra_pt: "Meteorologia"
obra_en: "Meteorology"
categoria: 02_fisica
obra_slug: 04_meteorologia
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Webster
livro_num: 2
livro_marker: "BOOK II"
capitulo_num: 3
capitulo_marker: "Part 3"
sub_cena_num: 2
sub_cena_total: 2
audio_in_obra_idx: 18
audio_in_obra_total: 44
chars: 7944
---

This being so we must go on to try to explain why the sea is salt.
There are many facts which make it clear that this taste is due to
the admixture of something. First, in animal bodies what is least
digested, the residue of liquid food, is salt and bitter, as we said
before. All animal excreta are undigested, but especially that which
gathers in the bladder (its extreme lightness proves this; for everything
that is digested is condensed), and also sweat; in these then is excreted
(along with other matter) an identical substance to which this flavour
is due. The case of things burnt is analogous. What heat fails to
assimilate becomes the excrementary residue in animal bodies, and,
in things burnt, ashes. That is why some people say that it was burnt
earth that made the sea salt. To say that it was burnt earth is absurd;
but to say that it was something like burnt earth is true. We must
suppose that just as in the cases we have described, so in the world
as a whole, everything that grows and is naturally generated always
leaves an undigested residue, like that of things burnt, consisting
of this sort of earth. All the earthy stuff in the dry exhalation
is of this nature, and it is the dry exhalation which accounts for
its great quantity. Now since, as we have said, the moist and the
dry evaporations are mixed, some quantity of this stuff must always
be included in the clouds and the water that are formed by condensation,
and must redescend to the earth in rain. This process must always
go on with such regularity as the sublunary world admits of. and it
is the answer to the question how the sea comes to be salt.

It also explains why rain that comes from the south, and the first
rains of autumn, are brackish. The south is the warmest of winds and
it blows from dry and hot regions. Hence it carries little moist vapour
and that is why it is hot. (It makes no difference even if this is
not its true character and it is originally a cold wind, for it becomes
warm on its way by incorporating with itself a great quantity of dry
evaporation from the places it passes over.) The north wind, on the
other hand, comb ing from moist regions, is full of vapour and therefore
cold. It is dry in our part of the world because it drives the clouds
away before it, but in the south it is rainy; just as the south is
a dry wind in Libya. So the south wind charges the rain that falls
with a great quantity of this stuff. Autumn rain is brackish because
the heaviest water must fall first; so that that which contains the
greatest quantity of this kind of earth descends quickest.

This, too, is why the sea is warm. Everything that has been exposed
to fire contains heat potentially, as we see in the case of lye and
ashes and the dry and liquid excreta of animals. Indeed those animals
which are hottest in the belly have the hottest excreta.

The action of this cause is continually making the sea more salt,
but some part of its saltness is always being drawn up with the sweet
water. This is less than the sweet water in the same ratio in which
the salt and brackish element in rain is less than the sweet, and
so the saltness of the sea remains constant on the whole. Salt water
when it turns into vapour becomes sweet, and the vapour does not form
salt water when it condenses again. This I know by experiment. The
same thing is true in every case of the kind: wine and all fluids
that evaporate and condense back into a liquid state become water.
They all are water modified by a certain admixture, the nature of
which determines their flavour. But this subject must be considered
on another more suitable occasion. 

For the present let us say this. The sea is there and some of it is
continually being drawn up and becoming sweet; this returns from above
with the rain. But it is now different from what it was when it was
drawn up, and its weight makes it sink below the sweet water. This
process prevents the sea, as it does rivers, from drying up except
from local causes (this must happen to sea and rivers alike). On the
other hand the parts neither of the earth nor of the sea remain constant
but only their whole bulk. For the same thing is true of the earth
as of the sea: some of it is carried up and some comes down with the
rain, and both that which remains on the surface and that which comes
down again change their situations. 

There is more evidence to prove that saltness is due to the admixture
of some substance, besides that which we have adduced. Make a vessel
of wax and put it in the sea, fastening its mouth in such a way as
to prevent any water getting in. Then the water that percolates through
the wax sides of the vessel is sweet, the earthy stuff, the admixture
of which makes the water salt, being separated off as it were by a
filter. It is this stuff which make salt water heavy (it weighs more
than fresh water) and thick. The difference in consistency is such
that ships with the same cargo very nearly sink in a river when they
are quite fit to navigate in the sea. This circumstance has before
now caused loss to shippers freighting their ships in a river. That
the thicker consistency is due to an admixture of something is proved
by the fact that if you make strong brine by the admixture of salt,
eggs, even when they are full, float in it. It almost becomes like
mud; such a quantity of earthy matter is there in the sea. The same
thing is done in salting fish. 

Again if, as is fabled, there is a lake in Palestine, such that if
you bind a man or beast and throw it in it floats and does not sink,
this would bear out what we have said. They say that this lake is
so bitter and salt that no fish live in it and that if you soak clothes
in it and shake them it cleans them. The following facts all of them
support our theory that it is some earthy stuff in the water which
makes it salt. In Chaonia there is a spring of brackish water that
flows into a neighbouring river which is sweet but contains no fish.
The local story is that when Heracles came from Erytheia driving the
oxen and gave the inhabitants the choice, they chose salt in preference
to fish. They get the salt from the spring. They boil off some of
the water and let the rest stand; when it has cooled and the heat
and moisture have evaporated together it gives them salt, not in lumps
but loose and light like snow. It is weaker than ordinary salt and
added freely gives a sweet taste, and it is not as white as salt generally
is. Another instance of this is found in Umbria. There is a place
there where reeds and rushes grow. They burn some of these, put the
ashes into water and boil it off. When a little water is left and
has cooled it gives a quantity of salt. 

Most salt rivers and springs must once have been hot. Then the original
fire in them was extinguished but the earth through which they percolate
preserves the character of lye or ashes. Springs and rivers with all
kinds of flavours are found in many places. These flavours must in
every case be due to the fire that is or was in them, for if you expose
earth to different degrees of heat it assumes various kinds and shades
of flavour. It becomes full of alum and lye and other things of the
kind, and the fresh water percolates through these and changes its
character. Sometimes it becomes acid as in Sicania, a part of Sicily.
There they get a salt and acid water which they use as vinegar to
season some of their dishes. In the neighbourhood of Lyncus, too,
there is a spring of acid water, and in Scythia a bitter spring. The
water from this makes the whole of the river into which it flows bitter.
These differences are explained by a knowledge of the particular mixtures
that determine different savours. But these have been explained in
another treatise. 

We have now given an account of waters and the sea, why they persist,
how they change, what their nature is, and have explained most of
their natural operations and affections.
