---
cena_id: 02_fisica/04_meteorologia/L04-C09_cena01
obra_pt: "Meteorologia"
obra_en: "Meteorology"
categoria: 02_fisica
obra_slug: 04_meteorologia
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Webster
livro_num: 4
livro_marker: "BOOK IV"
capitulo_num: 9
capitulo_marker: "Part 9"
sub_cena_num: 1
sub_cena_total: 2
audio_in_obra_idx: 40
audio_in_obra_total: 44
chars: 7692
---

Those bodies admit of softening which are not (like ice) made up of
water, but in which earth predominates. All their moisture must not
have left them (as in the case of natron and salt), nor must the relation
of dry to moist in them be incongruous (as in the case of pottery).
They must be tractile (without admitting water) or malleable (without
consisting of water), and the agent in softening them is fire. Such
are iron and horn. 

Both of bodies that can melt and of bodies that cannot, some do and
some do not admit of softening in water. Copper, for instance, which
can be melted, cannot be softened in water, whereas wool and earth
can be softened in water, for they can be soaked. (It is true that
though copper can be melted the agent in its case is not water, but
some of the bodies that can be melted by water too such as natron
and salt cannot be softened in water: for nothing is said to be so
affected unless the water soaks into it and makes it softer.) Some
things, on the other hand, such as wool and grain, can be softened
by water though they cannot be melted. Any body that is to be softened
by water must be of earth and must have its pores larger than the
particles of water, and the pores themselves must be able to resist
the action of water, whereas bodies that can be 'melted' by water
must have pores throughout. 

(Why is it that earth is both 'melted' and softened by moisture, while
natron is 'melted' but not softened? Because natron is pervaded throughout
by pores so that the parts are immediately divided by the water, but
earth has also pores which do not connect and is therefore differently
affected according as the water enters by one or the other set of
pores.) 

Some bodies can be bent or straightened, like the reed or the withy,
some cannot, like pottery and stone. Those bodies are apt to be bent
and straightened which can change from being curved to being straight
and from being straight to being curved, and bending and straightening
consist in the change or motion to the straight or to a curve, for
a thing is said to be in process of being bent whether it is being
made to assume a convex or a concave shape. So bending is defined
as motion to the convex or the concave without a change of length.
For if we added 'or to the straight', we should have a thing bent
and straight at once, and it is impossible for that which is straight
to be bent. And if all bending is a bending back or a bending down,
the former being a change to the convex, the latter to the concave,
a motion that leads to the straight cannot be called bending, but
bending and straightening are two different things. These, then, are
the things that can, and those that cannot be bent, and be straightened.

Some things can be both broken and comminuted, others admit only one
or the other. Wood, for instance, can be broken but not comminuted,
ice and stone can be comminuted but not broken, while pottery may
either be comminuted or broken. The distinction is this: breaking
is a division and separation into large parts, comminution into parts
of any size, but there must be more of them than two. Now those solids
that have many pores not communicating with one another are comminuible
(for the limit to their subdivision is set by the pores), but those
whose pores stretch continuously for a long way are breakable, while
those which have pores of both kinds are both comminuible and breakable.

Some things, e.g. copper and wax, are impressible, others, e.g. pottery
and water, are not. The process of being impressed is the sinking
of a part of the surface of a thing in response to pressure or a blow,
in general to contact. Such bodies are either soft, like wax, where
part of the surface is depressed while the rest remains, or hard,
like copper. Non-impressible bodies are either hard, like pottery
(its surface does not give way and sink in), or liquid, like water
(for though water does give way it is not in a part of it, for there
is a reciprocal change of place of all its parts). Those impressibles
that retain the shape impressed on them and are easily moulded by
the hand are called 'plastic'; those that are not easily moulded,
such as stone or wood, or are easily moulded but do not retain the
shape impressed, like wool or a sponge, are not plastic. The last
group are said to be 'squeezable'. Things are 'squeezable' when they
can contract into themselves under pressure, their surface sinking
in without being broken and without the parts interchanging position
as happens in the case of water. (We speak of pressure when there
is movement and the motor remains in contact with the thing moved,
of impact when the movement is due to the local movement of the motor.)
Those bodies are subject to squeezing which have empty pores-empty,
that is, of the stuff of which the body itself consists-and that can
sink upon the void spaces within them, or rather upon their pores.
For sometimes the pores upon which a body sinks in are not empty (a
wet sponge, for instance, has its pores full). But the pores, if full,
must be full of something softer than the body itself which is to
contract. Examples of things squeezable are the sponge, wax, flesh.
Those things are not squeezable which cannot be made to contract upon
their own pores by pressure, either because they have no pores or
because their pores are full of something too hard. Thus iron, stone,
water and all liquids are incapable of being squeezed. 

Things are tractile when their surface can be made to elongate, for
being drawn out is a movement of the surface, remaining unbroken,
in the direction of the mover. Some things are tractile, e.g. hair,
thongs, sinew, dough, birdlime, and some are not, e.g. water, stone.
Some things are both tractile and squeezable, e.g. wool; in other
cases the two qualities do not coincide; phlegm, for instance, is
tractile but not squeezable, and a sponge squeezable but not tractile.

Some things are malleable, like copper. Some are not, like stone and
wood. Things are malleable when their surface can be made to move
(but only in part) both downwards and sideways with one and the same
blow: when this is not possible a body is not malleable. All malleable
bodies are impressible, but not all impressible bodies are malleable,
e.g. wood, though on the whole the two go together. Of squeezable
things some are malleable and some not: wax and mud are malleable,
wool is not. Some things are fissile, e.g. wood, some are not, e.g.
potter's clay. A thing is fissile when it is apt to divide in advance
of the instrument dividing it, for a body is said to split when it
divides to a further point than that to which the dividing instrument
divides it and the act of division advances: which is not the case
with cutting. Those bodies which cannot behave like this are non-fissile.
Nothing soft is fissile (by soft I mean absolutely soft and not relatively:
for iron itself may be relatively soft); nor are all hard things fissile,
but only such as are neither liquid nor impressible nor comminuible.
Such are the bodies that have the pores along which they cohere lengthwise
and not crosswise. 

Those hard or soft solids are apt to be cut which do not necessarily
either split in advance of the instrument or break into minute fragments
when they are being divided. Those that necessarily do so and liquids
cannot be cut. Some things can be both split and cut, like wood, though
generally it is lengthwise that a thing can be split and crosswise
that it can be cut. For, a body being divided into many parts fin
so far as its unity is made up of many lengths it is apt to be split,
in so far as it is made up of many breadths it is apt to be cut.
