---
obra_pt: "Retórica"
obra_en: "Rhetoric"
categoria: 07_retorica_poetica
obra_slug: 01_retorica
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Roberts
livro_num: 3
livro_marker: "BOOK III"
total_livros: 3
capitulo_num: 14
capitulo_marker: "Part 14"
total_capitulos_no_livro: 19
bytes: 7827
chars_aprox: 7827
---

The Introduction is the beginning of a speech, corresponding to the
prologue in poetry and the prelude in flute-music; they are all beginnings,
paving the way, as it were, for what is to follow. The musical prelude
resembles the introduction to speeches of display; as flute players
play first some brilliant passage they know well and then fit it on
to the opening notes of the piece itself, so in speeches of display
the writer should proceed in the same way; he should begin with what
best takes his fancy, and then strike up his theme and lead into it;
which is indeed what is always done. (Take as an example the introduction
to the Helen of Isocrates-there is nothing in common between the 'eristics'
and Helen.) And here, even if you travel far from your subject, it
is fitting, rather than that there should be sameness in the entire
speech. 

The usual subject for the introductions to speeches of display is
some piece of praise or censure. Thus Gorgias writes in his Olympic
Speech, 'You deserve widespread admiration, men of Greece', praising
thus those who start,ed the festival gatherings.' Isocrates, on the
other hand, censures them for awarding distinctions to fine athletes
but giving no prize for intellectual ability. Or one may begin with
a piece of advice, thus: 'We ought to honour good men and so I myself
am praising Aristeides' or 'We ought to honour those who are unpopular
but not bad men, men whose good qualities have never been noticed,
like Alexander son of Priam.' Here the orator gives advice. Or we
may begin as speakers do in the law-courts; that is to say, with appeals
to the audience to excuse us if our speech is about something paradoxical,
difficult, or hackneyed; like Choerilus in the lines- 

"But now when allotment of all has been made... "

Introductions to speeches of display, then, may be composed of some
piece of praise or censure, of advice to do or not to do something,
or of appeals to the audience; and you must choose between making
these preliminary passages connected or disconnected with the speech
itself. 

Introductions to forensic speeches, it must be observed, have the
same value as the prologues of dramas and the introductions to epic
poems; the dithyrambic prelude resembling the introduction to a speech
of display, as 

"For thee, and thy gilts, and thy battle-spoils.... "

In prologues, and in epic poetry, a foretaste of the theme is given,
intended to inform the hearers of it in advance instead of keeping
their minds in suspense. Anything vague puzzles them: so give them
a grasp of the beginning, and they can hold fast to it and follow
the argument. So we find- 

"Sing, O goddess of song, of the Wrath... 

"Tell me, O Muse, of the hero... 

"Lead me to tell a new tale, how there came great warfare to Europe

"Out of the Asian land... "

The tragic poets, too, let us know the pivot of their play; if not
at the outset like Euripides, at least somewhere in the preface to
a speech like Sophocles- 

"Polybus was my father...; "

and so in Comedy. This, then, is the most essential function and
distinctive property of the introduction, to show what the aim of
the speech is; and therefore no introduction ought to be employed
where the subject is not long or intricate. 

The other kinds of introduction employed are remedial in purpose,
and may be used in any type of speech. They are concerned with the
speaker, the hearer, the subject, or the speaker's opponent. Those
concerned with the speaker himself or with his opponent are directed
to removing or exciting prejudice. But whereas the defendant will
begin by dealing with this sort of thing, the prosecutor will take
quite another line and deal with such matters in the closing part
of his speech. The reason for this is not far to seek. The defendant,
when he is going to bring himself on the stage, must clear away any
obstacles, and therefore must begin by removing any prejudice felt
against him. But if you are to excite prejudice, you must do so at
the close, so that the judges may more easily remember what you have
said. 

The appeal to the hearer aims at securing his goodwill, or at arousing
his resentment, or sometimes at gaining his serious attention to the
case, or even at distracting it-for gaining it is not always an advantage,
and speakers will often for that reason try to make him laugh.

You may use any means you choose to make your hearer receptive; among
others, giving him a good impression of your character, which always
helps to secure his attention. He will be ready to attend to anything
that touches himself and to anything that is important, surprising,
or agreeable; and you should accordingly convey to him the impression
that what you have to say is of this nature. If you wish to distract
his attention, you should imply that the subject does not affect him,
or is trivial or disagreeable. But observe, all this has nothing to
do with the speech itself. It merely has to do with the weak-minded
tendency of the hearer to listen to what is beside the point. Where
this tendency is absent, no introduction wanted beyond a summary statement
of your subject, to put a sort of head on the main body of your speech.
Moreover, calls for attention, when required, may come equally well
in any part of a speech; in fact, the beginning of it is just where
there is least slackness of interest; it is therefore ridiculous to
put this kind of thing at the beginning, when every one is listening
with most attention. Choose therefore any point in the speech where
such an appeal is needed, and then say 'Now I beg you to note this
point-it concerns you quite as much as myself'; or 

"I will tell you that whose like you have never yet "

heard for terror, or for wonder. This is what Prodicus called 'slipping
in a bit of the fifty-drachma show-lecture for the audience whenever
they began to nod'. It is plain that such introductions are addressed
not to ideal hearers, but to hearers as we find them. The use of introductions
to excite prejudice or to dispel misgivings is universal-

"My lord, I will not say that eagerly... "

or 

"Why all this preface? "

Introductions are popular with those whose case is weak, or looks
weak; it pays them to dwell on anything rather than the actual facts
of it. That is why slaves, instead of answering the questions put
to them, make indirect replies with long preambles. The means of exciting
in your hearers goodwill and various other feelings of the same kind
have already been described. The poet finely says May I find in Phaeacian
hearts, at my coming, goodwill and compassion; and these are the two
things we should aim at. In speeches of display we must make the hearer
feel that the eulogy includes either himself or his family or his
way of life or something or other of the kind. For it is true, as
Socrates says in the Funeral Speech, that 'the difficulty is not to
praise the Athenians at Athens but at Sparta'. 

The introductions of political oratory will be made out of the same
materials as those of the forensic kind, though the nature of political
oratory makes them very rare. The subject is known already, and therefore
the facts of the case need no introduction; but you may have to say
something on account of yourself or to your opponents; or those present
may be inclined to treat the matter either more or less seriously
than you wish them to. You may accordingly have to excite or dispel
some prejudice, or to make the matter under discussion seem more or
less important than before: for either of which purposes you will
want an introduction. You may also want one to add elegance to your
remarks, feeling that otherwise they will have a casual air, like
Gorgias' eulogy of the Eleans, in which, without any preliminary sparring
or fencing, he begins straight off with 'Happy city of Elis!'
