---
obra_pt: "Física"
obra_en: "Physics"
categoria: 02_fisica
obra_slug: 01_fisica
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Hardie-Gaye
livro_num: 8
livro_marker: "BOOK VIII"
total_livros: 8
capitulo_num: 8
capitulo_marker: "Part 8"
total_capitulos_no_livro: 10
bytes: 20216
chars_aprox: 20216
---

Let us now proceed to maintain that it is possible that there should
be an infinite motion that is single and continuous, and that this
motion is rotatory motion. The motion of everything that is in process
of locomotion is either rotatory or rectilinear or a compound of the
two: consequently, if one of the former two is not continuous, that
which is composed of them both cannot be continuous either. Now it
is plain that if the locomotion of a thing is rectilinear and finite
it is not continuous locomotion: for the thing must turn back, and
that which turns back in a straight line undergoes two contrary locomotions,
since, so far as motion in respect of place is concerned, upward motion
is the contrary of downward motion, forward motion of backward motion,
and motion to the left of motion to the right, these being the pairs
of contraries in the sphere of place. But we have already defined
single and continuous motion to be motion of a single thing in a single
period of time and operating within a sphere admitting of no further
specific differentiation (for we have three things to consider, first
that which is in motion, e.g. a man or a god, secondly the 'when'
of the motion, that is to say, the time, and thirdly the sphere within
which it operates, which may be either place or affection or essential
form or magnitude): and contraries are specifically not one and the
same but distinct: and within the sphere of place we have the above-mentioned
distinctions. Moreover we have an indication that motion from A to
B is the contrary of motion from B to A in the fact that, if they
occur at the same time, they arrest and stop each other. And the same
is true in the case of a circle: the motion from A towards B is the
contrary of the motion from A towards G: for even if they are continuous
and there is no turning back they arrest each other, because contraries
annihilate or obstruct one another. On the other hand lateral motion
is not the contrary of upward motion. But what shows most clearly
that rectilinear motion cannot be continuous is the fact that turning
back necessarily implies coming to a stand, not only when it is a
straight line that is traversed, but also in the case of locomotion
in a circle (which is not the same thing as rotatory locomotion: for,
when a thing merely traverses a circle, it may either proceed on its
course without a break or turn back again when it has reached the
same point from which it started). We may assure ourselves of the
necessity of this coming to a stand not only on the strength of observation,
but also on theoretical grounds. We may start as follows: we have
three points, starting-point, middle-point, and finishing-point, of
which the middle-point in virtue of the relations in which it stands
severally to the other two is both a starting-point and a finishing-point,
and though numerically one is theoretically two. We have further the
distinction between the potential and the actual. So in the straight
line in question any one of the points lying between the two extremes
is potentially a middle-point: but it is not actually so unless that
which is in motion divides the line by coming to a stand at that point
and beginning its motion again: thus the middle-point becomes both
a starting-point and a goal, the starting-point of the latter part
and the finishing-point of the first part of the motion. This is the
case e.g. when A in the course of its locomotion comes to a stand
at B and starts again towards G: but when its motion is continuous
A cannot either have come to be or have ceased to be at the point
B: it can only have been there at the moment of passing, its passage
not being contained within any period of time except the whole of
which the particular moment is a dividing-point. To maintain that
it has come to be and ceased to be there will involve the consequence
that A in the course of its locomotion will always be coming to a
stand: for it is impossible that A should simultaneously have come
to be at B and ceased to be there, so that the two things must have
happened at different points of time, and therefore there will be
the intervening period of time: consequently A will be in a state
of rest at B, and similarly at all other points, since the same reasoning
holds good in every case. When to A, that which is in process of locomotion,
B, the middle-point, serves both as a finishing-point and as a starting-point
for its motion, A must come to a stand at B, because it makes it two
just as one might do in thought. However, the point A is the real
starting-point at which the moving body has ceased to be, and it is
at G that it has really come to be when its course is finished and
it comes to a stand. So this is how we must meet the difficulty that
then arises, which is as follows. Suppose the line E is equal to the
line Z, that A proceeds in continuous locomotion from the extreme
point of E to G, and that, at the moment when A is at the point B,
D is proceeding in uniform locomotion and with the same velocity as
A from the extremity of Z to H: then, says the argument, D will have
reached H before A has reached G for that which makes an earlier start
and departure must make an earlier arrival: the reason, then, for
the late arrival of A is that it has not simultaneously come to be
and ceased to be at B: otherwise it will not arrive later: for this
to happen it will be necessary that it should come to a stand there.
Therefore we must not hold that there was a moment when A came to
be at B and that at the same moment D was in motion from the extremity
of Z: for the fact of A's having come to be at B will involve the
fact of its also ceasing to be there, and the two events will not
be simultaneous, whereas the truth is that A is at B at a sectional
point of time and does not occupy time there. In this case, therefore,
where the motion of a thing is continuous, it is impossible to use
this form of expression. On the other hand in the case of a thing
that turns back in its course we must do so. For suppose H in the
course of its locomotion proceeds to D and then turns back and proceeds
downwards again: then the extreme point D has served as finishing-point
and as starting-point for it, one point thus serving as two: therefore
H must have come to a stand there: it cannot have come to be at D
and departed from D simultaneously, for in that case it would simultaneously
be there and not be there at the same moment. And here we cannot apply
the argument used to solve the difficulty stated above: we cannot
argue that H is at D at a sectional point of time and has not come
to be or ceased to be there. For here the goal that is reached is
necessarily one that is actually, not potentially, existent. Now the
point in the middle is potential: but this one is actual, and regarded
from below it is a finishing-point, while regarded from above it is
a starting-point, so that it stands in these same two respective relations
to the two motions. Therefore that which turns back in traversing
a rectilinear course must in so doing come to a stand. Consequently
there cannot be a continuous rectilinear motion that is eternal.

The same method should also be adopted in replying to those who ask,
in the terms of Zeno's argument, whether we admit that before any
distance can be traversed half the distance must be traversed, that
these half-distances are infinite in number, and that it is impossible
to traverse distances infinite in number-or some on the lines of this
same argument put the questions in another form, and would have us
grant that in the time during which a motion is in progress it should
be possible to reckon a half-motion before the whole for every half-distance
that we get, so that we have the result that when the whole distance
is traversed we have reckoned an infinite number, which is admittedly
impossible. Now when we first discussed the question of motion we
put forward a solution of this difficulty turning on the fact that
the period of time occupied in traversing the distance contains within
itself an infinite number of units: there is no absurdity, we said,
in supposing the traversing of infinite distances in infinite time,
and the element of infinity is present in the time no less than in
the distance. But, although this solution is adequate as a reply to
the questioner (the question asked being whether it is possible in
a finite time to traverse or reckon an infinite number of units),
nevertheless as an account of the fact and explanation of its true
nature it is inadequate. For suppose the distance to be left out of
account and the question asked to be no longer whether it is possible
in a finite time to traverse an infinite number of distances, and
suppose that the inquiry is made to refer to the time taken by itself
(for the time contains an infinite number of divisions): then this
solution will no longer be adequate, and we must apply the truth that
we enunciated in our recent discussion, stating it in the following
way. In the act of dividing the continuous distance into two halves
one point is treated as two, since we make it a starting-point and
a finishing-point: and this same result is also produced by the act
of reckoning halves as well as by the act of dividing into halves.
But if divisions are made in this way, neither the distance nor the
motion will be continuous: for motion if it is to be continuous must
relate to what is continuous: and though what is continuous contains
an infinite number of halves, they are not actual but potential halves.
If the halves are made actual, we shall get not a continuous but an
intermittent motion. In the case of reckoning the halves, it is clear
that this result follows: for then one point must be reckoned as two:
it will be the finishing-point of the one half and the starting-point
of the other, if we reckon not the one continuous whole but the two
halves. Therefore to the question whether it is possible to pass through
an infinite number of units either of time or of distance we must
reply that in a sense it is and in a sense it is not. If the units
are actual, it is not possible: if they are potential, it is possible.
For in the course of a continuous motion the traveller has traversed
an infinite number of units in an accidental sense but not in an unqualified
sense: for though it is an accidental characteristic of the distance
to be an infinite number of half-distances, this is not its real and
essential character. It is also plain that unless we hold that the
point of time that divides earlier from later always belongs only
to the later so far as the thing is concerned, we shall be involved
in the consequence that the same thing is at the same moment existent
and not existent, and that a thing is not existent at the moment when
it has become. It is true that the point is common to both times,
the earlier as well as the later, and that, while numerically one
and the same, it is theoretically not so, being the finishing-point
of the one and the starting-point of the other: but so far as the
thing is concerned it belongs to the later stage of what happens to
it. Let us suppose a time ABG and a thing D, D being white in the
time A and not-white in the time B. Then D is at the moment G white
and not-white: for if we were right in saying that it is white during
the whole time A, it is true to call it white at any moment of A,
and not-white in B, and G is in both A and B. We must not allow, therefore,
that it is white in the whole of A, but must say that it is so in
all of it except the last moment G. G belongs already to the later
period, and if in the whole of A not-white was in process of becoming
and white of perishing, at G the process is complete. And so G is
the first moment at which it is true to call the thing white or not
white respectively. Otherwise a thing may be non-existent at the moment
when it has become and existent at the moment when it has perished:
or else it must be possible for a thing at the same time to be white
and not white and in fact to be existent and non-existent. Further,
if anything that exists after having been previously non-existent
must become existent and does not exist when it is becoming, time
cannot be divisible into time-atoms. For suppose that D was becoming
white in the time A and that at another time B, a time-atom consecutive
with the last atom of A, D has already become white and so is white
at that moment: then, inasmuch as in the time A it was becoming white
and so was not white and at the moment B it is white, there must have
been a becoming between A and B and therefore also a time in which
the becoming took place. On the other hand, those who deny atoms of
time (as we do) are not affected by this argument: according to them
D has become and so is white at the last point of the actual time
in which it was becoming white: and this point has no other point
consecutive with or in succession to it, whereas time-atoms are conceived
as successive. Moreover it is clear that if D was becoming white in
the whole time A, the time occupied by it in having become white in
addition to having been in process of becoming white is no more than
all that it occupied in the mere process of becoming white.

These and such-like, then, are the arguments for our conclusion that
derive cogency from the fact that they have a special bearing on the
point at issue. If we look at the question from the point of view
of general theory, the same result would also appear to be indicated
by the following arguments. Everything whose motion is continuous
must, on arriving at any point in the course of its locomotion, have
been previously also in process of locomotion to that point, if it
is not forced out of its path by anything: e.g. on arriving at B a
thing must also have been in process of locomotion to B, and that
not merely when it was near to B, but from the moment of its starting
on its course, since there can be, no reason for its being so at any
particular stage rather than at an earlier one. So, too, in the case
of the other kinds of motion. Now we are to suppose that a thing proceeds
in locomotion from A to G and that at the moment of its arrival at
G the continuity of its motion is unbroken and will remain so until
it has arrived back at A. Then when it is undergoing locomotion from
A to G it is at the same time undergoing also its locomotion to A
from G: consequently it is simultaneously undergoing two contrary
motions, since the two motions that follow the same straight line
are contrary to each other. With this consequence there also follows
another: we have a thing that is in process of change from a position
in which it has not yet been: so, inasmuch as this is impossible,
the thing must come to a stand at G. Therefore the motion is not a
single motion, since motion that is interrupted by stationariness
is not single. 

Further, the following argument will serve better to make this point
clear universally in respect of every kind of motion. If the motion
undergone by that which is in motion is always one of those already
enumerated, and the state of rest that it undergoes is one of those
that are the opposites of the motions (for we found that there could
be no other besides these), and moreover that which is undergoing
but does not always undergo a particular motion (by this I mean one
of the various specifically distinct motions, not some particular
part of the whole motion) must have been previously undergoing the
state of rest that is the opposite of the motion, the state of rest
being privation of motion; then, inasmuch as the two motions that
follow the same straight line are contrary motions, and it is impossible
for a thing to undergo simultaneously two contrary motions, that which
is undergoing locomotion from A to G cannot also simultaneously be
undergoing locomotion from G to A: and since the latter locomotion
is not simultaneous with the former but is still to be undergone,
before it is undergone there must occur a state of rest at G: for
this, as we found, is the state of rest that is the opposite of the
motion from G. The foregoing argument, then, makes it plain that the
motion in question is not continuous. 

Our next argument has a more special bearing than the foregoing on
the point at issue. We will suppose that there has occurred in something
simultaneously a perishing of not-white and a becoming of white. Then
if the alteration to white and from white is a continuous process
and the white does not remain any time, there must have occurred simultaneously
a perishing of not-white, a becoming of white, and a becoming of not-white:
for the time of the three will be the same. 

Again, from the continuity of the time in which the motion takes place
we cannot infer continuity in the motion, but only successiveness:
in fact, how could contraries, e.g. whiteness and blackness, meet
in the same extreme point? 

On the other hand, in motion on a circular line we shall find singleness
and continuity: for here we are met by no impossible consequence:
that which is in motion from A will in virtue of the same direction
of energy be simultaneously in motion to A (since it is in motion
to the point at which it will finally arrive), and yet will not be
undergoing two contrary or opposite motions: for a motion to a point
and a motion from that point are not always contraries or opposites:
they are contraries only if they are on the same straight line (for
then they are contrary to one another in respect of place, as e.g.
the two motions along the diameter of the circle, since the ends of
this are at the greatest possible distance from one another), and
they are opposites only if they are along the same line. Therefore
in the case we are now considering there is nothing to prevent the
motion being continuous and free from all intermission: for rotatory
motion is motion of a thing from its place to its place, whereas rectilinear
motion is motion from its place to another place. 

Moreover the progress of rotatory motion is never localized within
certain fixed limits, whereas that of rectilinear motion repeatedly
is so. Now a motion that is always shifting its ground from moment
to moment can be continuous: but a motion that is repeatedly localized
within certain fixed limits cannot be so, since then the same thing
would have to undergo simultaneously two opposite motions. So, too,
there cannot be continuous motion in a semicircle or in any other
arc of a circle, since here also the same ground must be traversed
repeatedly and two contrary processes of change must occur. The reason
is that in these motions the starting-point and the termination do
not coincide, whereas in motion over a circle they do coincide, and
so this is the only perfect motion. 

This differentiation also provides another means of showing that the
other kinds of motion cannot be continuous either: for in all of them
we find that there is the same ground to be traversed repeatedly;
thus in alteration there are the intermediate stages of the process,
and in quantitative change there are the intervening degrees of magnitude:
and in becoming and perishing the same thing is true. It makes no
difference whether we take the intermediate stages of the process
to be few or many, or whether we add or subtract one: for in either
case we find that there is still the same ground to be traversed repeatedly.
Moreover it is plain from what has been said that those physicists
who assert that all sensible things are always in motion are wrong:
for their motion must be one or other of the motions just mentioned:
in fact they mostly conceive it as alteration (things are always in
flux and decay, they say), and they go so far as to speak even of
becoming and perishing as a process of alteration. On the other hand,
our argument has enabled us to assert the fact, applying universally
to all motions, that no motion admits of continuity except rotatory
motion: consequently neither alteration nor increase admits of continuity.
We need now say no more in support of the position that there is no
process of change that admits of infinity or continuity except rotatory
locomotion.
