---
obra_pt: "Da Interpretação"
obra_en: "On Interpretation"
categoria: 01_organon
obra_slug: 02_da_interpretacao
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Edghill
livro_num: 1
livro_marker: "SECTION 1"
total_livros: 2
capitulo_num: 9
capitulo_marker: "Part 9"
total_capitulos_no_livro: 10
bytes: 8376
chars_aprox: 8376
---

In the case of that which is or which has taken place, propositions,
whether positive or negative, must be true or false. Again, in the
case of a pair of contradictories, either when the subject is universal
and the propositions are of a universal character, or when it is individual,
as has been said,' one of the two must be true and the other false;
whereas when the subject is universal, but the propositions are not
of a universal character, there is no such necessity. We have discussed
this type also in a previous chapter. 

When the subject, however, is individual, and that which is predicated
of it relates to the future, the case is altered. For if all propositions
whether positive or negative are either true or false, then any given
predicate must either belong to the subject or not, so that if one
man affirms that an event of a given character will take place and
another denies it, it is plain that the statement of the one will
correspond with reality and that of the other will not. For the predicate
cannot both belong and not belong to the subject at one and the same
time with regard to the future. 

Thus, if it is true to say that a thing is white, it must necessarily
be white; if the reverse proposition is true, it will of necessity
not be white. Again, if it is white, the proposition stating that
it is white was true; if it is not white, the proposition to the opposite
effect was true. And if it is not white, the man who states that it
is making a false statement; and if the man who states that it is
white is making a false statement, it follows that it is not white.
It may therefore be argued that it is necessary that affirmations
or denials must be either true or false. 

Now if this be so, nothing is or takes place fortuitously, either
in the present or in the future, and there are no real alternatives;
everything takes place of necessity and is fixed. For either he that
affirms that it will take place or he that denies this is in correspondence
with fact, whereas if things did not take place of necessity, an event
might just as easily not happen as happen; for the meaning of the
word 'fortuitous' with regard to present or future events is that
reality is so constituted that it may issue in either of two opposite
directions. Again, if a thing is white now, it was true before to
say that it would be white, so that of anything that has taken place
it was always true to say 'it is' or 'it will be'. But if it was always
true to say that a thing is or will be, it is not possible that it
should not be or not be about to be, and when a thing cannot not come
to be, it is impossible that it should not come to be, and when it
is impossible that it should not come to be, it must come to be. All,
then, that is about to be must of necessity take place. It results
from this that nothing is uncertain or fortuitous, for if it were
fortuitous it would not be necessary. 

Again, to say that neither the affirmation nor the denial is true,
maintaining, let us say, that an event neither will take place nor
will not take place, is to take up a position impossible to defend.
In the first place, though facts should prove the one proposition
false, the opposite would still be untrue. Secondly, if it was true
to say that a thing was both white and large, both these qualities
must necessarily belong to it; and if they will belong to it the next
day, they must necessarily belong to it the next day. But if an event
is neither to take place nor not to take place the next day, the element
of chance will be eliminated. For example, it would be necessary that
a sea-fight should neither take place nor fail to take place on the
next day. 

These awkward results and others of the same kind follow, if it is
an irrefragable law that of every pair of contradictory propositions,
whether they have regard to universals and are stated as universally
applicable, or whether they have regard to individuals, one must be
true and the other false, and that there are no real alternatives,
but that all that is or takes place is the outcome of necessity. There
would be no need to deliberate or to take trouble, on the supposition
that if we should adopt a certain course, a certain result would follow,
while, if we did not, the result would not follow. For a man may predict
an event ten thousand years beforehand, and another may predict the
reverse; that which was truly predicted at the moment in the past
will of necessity take place in the fullness of time. 

Further, it makes no difference whether people have or have not actually
made the contradictory statements. For it is manifest that the circumstances
are not influenced by the fact of an affirmation or denial on the
part of anyone. For events will not take place or fail to take place
because it was stated that they would or would not take place, nor
is this any more the case if the prediction dates back ten thousand
years or any other space of time. Wherefore, if through all time the
nature of things was so constituted that a prediction about an event
was true, then through all time it was necessary that that should
find fulfillment; and with regard to all events, circumstances have
always been such that their occurrence is a matter of necessity. For
that of which someone has said truly that it will be, cannot fail
to take place; and of that which takes place, it was always true to
say that it would be. 

Yet this view leads to an impossible conclusion; for we see that both
deliberation and action are causative with regard to the future, and
that, to speak more generally, in those things which are not continuously
actual there is potentiality in either direction. Such things may
either be or not be; events also therefore may either take place or
not take place. There are many obvious instances of this. It is possible
that this coat may be cut in half, and yet it may not be cut in half,
but wear out first. In the same way, it is possible that it should
not be cut in half; unless this were so, it would not be possible
that it should wear out first. So it is therefore with all other events
which possess this kind of potentiality. It is therefore plain that
it is not of necessity that everything is or takes place; but in some
instances there are real alternatives, in which case the affirmation
is no more true and no more false than the denial; while some exhibit
a predisposition and general tendency in one direction or the other,
and yet can issue in the opposite direction by exception.

Now that which is must needs be when it is, and that which is not
must needs not be when it is not. Yet it cannot be said without qualification
that all existence and non-existence is the outcome of necessity.
For there is a difference between saying that that which is, when
it is, must needs be, and simply saying that all that is must needs
be, and similarly in the case of that which is not. In the case, also,
of two contradictory propositions this holds good. Everything must
either be or not be, whether in the present or in the future, but
it is not always possible to distinguish and state determinately which
of these alternatives must necessarily come about. 

Let me illustrate. A sea-fight must either take place to-morrow or
not, but it is not necessary that it should take place to-morrow,
neither is it necessary that it should not take place, yet it is necessary
that it either should or should not take place to-morrow. Since propositions
correspond with facts, it is evident that when in future events there
is a real alternative, and a potentiality in contrary directions,
the corresponding affirmation and denial have the same character.

This is the case with regard to that which is not always existent
or not always nonexistent. One of the two propositions in such instances
must be true and the other false, but we cannot say determinately
that this or that is false, but must leave the alternative undecided.
One may indeed be more likely to be true than the other, but it cannot
be either actually true or actually false. It is therefore plain that
it is not necessary that of an affirmation and a denial one should
be true and the other false. For in the case of that which exists
potentially, but not actually, the rule which applies to that which
exists actually does not hold good. The case is rather as we have
indicated.
