|                             |                        |
|-----------------------------|------------------------|
| 3 | *BEYOND GOOD AMD EVIL* |

WE now come to Blake’s ethical and political ideas, which, like his religion, are founded on his theory of knowledge. It is impossible for a human being to live completely in the world of sense. Somehow or other the floating linear series of impressions must be ordered and united by the mind. One must adopt either the way of imagination or the way of memory; no compromise or neutrality is possible. He who is not for the imagination is against it. Religion insists that however mixed good and bad may be in this world, there are eternally only heaven and hell, with a great gulf between. For the apocalypse or vision of eternity is at the same time a Last Judgment, an absolute separation of sheep from goats, of the men who have used their varying amounts of talents from the men who have hidden theirs. In eternity all the confused and eclectic and weakly tolerant are obviously on the wrong side. Hence the duty of the imaginative man is to force the issue and compel decisions.

To the extent that a man has imagination he is alive, and therefore the development of the imagination is an increase of life. It follows that restricting the imagination by turning from instead of passing through perception is a reduction of life. It must then tend in the direction of death, so that all imaginative restraint is ultimately, not that it always proceeds to ultimates, a death-impulse. Hence evil is negative: all evil consists either in self-restraint or restraint of others. There can be no such thing, strictly speaking, as an evil act; all acts are good, and evil comes when activity is perverted into the frustration of activity, in oneself or others. But Blake himself is clearer than any paraphrase:

But as I understand Vice it is a Negative…. Accident is the omission of act in self & the hindering of act in another; This is Vice, but all Act is Virtue. To hinder another is not an act; it is the contrary; it is a restraint on action both in ourselves & in the person hinder’d, for he who hinders another omits his own duty at the same time. Murder is Hindering Another. Theft is Hindering Another. Backbiting, Undermining, Circumventing, & whatever is Negative is Vice.<sup>[1](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn001)</sup>

To the theologian all vice resolves itself into pride or self-will, and in a way this is also true of Blake, but perhaps such words as the medieval *“accidia,”* the Elizabethan “melancholy” or Baudelaire’s *“ennui”* are closer to Blake’s conception of negative evil. Blake’s own word for it is “jealousy.” By turning away from the world to be perceived we develop an imaginative idleness which spreads a sickness and lassitude over the whole soul, and all vices spring from this. It does not matter whether the sickness is expressed inwardly or outwardly. Murder is obviously an expression of the same death-impulse that suicide is, and all evil acts are more or less murderous. “Sooner murder an infant in its cradle than nurse unacted desires,”<sup>[2](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn002)</sup> says Blake: self-denial for no imaginative reason is suicide *in petto;* slander is murdering a reputation which is as vital to a man as his throat. This death-impulse, this perverted wish to cut down and restrict the scope of life, is the touchstone not only of all the obvious vices, but of many acts often not classified as such, like teasing, instilling fear or discouragement, or exacting unthinking obedience. It is quite inadequate to call self-interest a motive of evil conduct, though the death-impulse may be disguised in that form. Self-interest implies a good deal of control: in all extreme vices there is a mania in which one is hagridden by a “ruling passion.” Self-interest may explain the profiteer, but not the miser:

Those who say that men are led by interest are knaves. A knavish character will often say, “of what interest is it to me to do so and so?” I answer, “of none at all, but the contrary, as you well know. It is of malice and envy that you have done this; hence I am aware of you, because I know that you act, not from interest, but from malice, even to your destruction.”<sup>[3](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn003)</sup>

The development of the imagination is a continuous process of synthesis. The perverted imagination with nothing real to work on is forced to turn analytic and dissective, and all dissected things are uniformly hideous. We can see this most clearly in cadavers, but only because we can see it at all there: the idea of a “proportion” with the proportions of all things mixed up in it is equally monstrous, and the idea of a rose with its “secondary qualities” of color and scent removed equally unlovable. Blake always thinks of cruelty as something very close to mischievous curiosity. The prototype of Nero is the bored schoolboy pulling wings off a butterfly. Fear, another fruitful source of evil, is not so much the horror of the unknown as a fascinated attraction to it. The mind of the reflecting reasoner feels a kinship with mystery which paralyzes him into remaining in it; and he does not want it removed. Columbus and Marco Polo were not popular when they returned home, and the prophets, the explorers of the spiritual world, are notoriously unwelcome in their own countries.

We may develop this conception of cruelty and fear a little further. We saw in the first chapter that the “memory,” by separating the subject and object, may quite consistently turn a man into either a navel-gazer or an atomist, but that from the point of view of the imagination it does not matter which. In the second chapter we saw that the same tendency in religion may make a man either an inert contemplative or an antinomian. In ordinary life exactly the same distinction holds. A man may specialize in self-restraint or in restraint of others. The former produces the vices which spring from fear; the latter those which spring from cruelty. But the thwarting of imagination is the basis of both: all the cruel are frightened, and all the fearful are cruel.

The relation between these two groups does not extend beyond the social and political, for whatever gods they may have do not exist, and they appear in life as tyrants and victims of tyrants. They are numerous enough, and the imaginative rare enough, to present a uniform picture of a group of tyrants exploiting a larger group of victims all through history. The image of parasite and host is the best one for them, as it brings out Blake’s point that both groups are essentially passive. The parasite is passive because it clings to the host; the host, because it endures the parasite. Tyranny is seldom (in the long run, never) imposed on people from without; it is a projection of their own pusillanimity. Tyranny and mob rule are the same thing. The tyrant in Blake is always an isolated, inscrutable brooder—the inscrutability of the king’s mind, incidentally, is a favorite theme of Bacon’s—and because he is that he is truly representative of his victims. For in the state of “memory” or reflection we withdraw into ourselves and are locked up there with our own keys in a dark spiritual solitude in which we are unable to conceive activity except in terms of hindrance and restraint.

This seems to contradict what we have said about imagination as self-development. But self-development leads us into a higher state of integration with a larger imaginative unit which is ultimately God. Hence the paradox that one gains his life by losing it, which Jesus taught. The selfish or egocentric are incapable of *developing* themselves; that comes from expansion outward, not withdrawal inward. Hence there are two selves in man absolutely opposed to one another, the better self which grows and lives and the worse self which rots and withers, the good and the evil angel:

Man is a twofold being, one part capable of evil & the other capable of good; that which is capable of good is not also capable of evil, but that which is capable of evil is also capable of good.<sup>[4](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn004)</sup>

Blake accepts the doctrine of original sin with the modification that man is not “simple & yet capable of evil,” which we shall consider in a moment. We are born into a fallen world and are therefore born with a “natural” tendency to make the most rather than the best of it, to accept it as final reality. But if man were really natural he would be a simple being like an animal in whom selfishness and self-development are the same thing. Most apologies for tyranny are based on analogies from nature, based in their turn on the assumption either that man is essentially natural or that nature is divinely ordered. But the polities of the wolf pack and the beehive are not good enough for us. Both the tyrant and his victim are in a state of nature, and both are in that state of animal self-absorption which Blake calls the Selfhood. This word, a very important one in his thought, will be used henceforth to replace “memory” and “reflection.”

Man has within him the principle of life and the principle of death: one is the imagination, the other the natural man. In the natural world the natural principle will win out eventually and the man will die. As an individual ego reflecting on his sensations of an outer space-world while existing in time, the natural man is a dying man; and like most chronic invalids the ego is fretful, irascible, cruel, bothered by trifles, jealous and inordinately vain. Its only freedom is in domineering over or hindering others; its only happiness is in solitary possession; and in everything it does it seeks, like Cleopatra, for a painless form of suicide.

The only possible cure for the original sin of this Selfhood of the natural man is vision, the revelation that this world is fallen and therefore not ultimate. There is no such thing in the long run as necessary evil. “Mercy, Pity, Peace and Love” appear to be only palliatives against the antecedent evils of cruelty, war and jealousy, which may suggest that they could not exist without evil, as a doctor cannot exist without disease. But that is nonsense: destroy the evil, and the four virtues will be seen to be the attributes of unfallen Man. We have already mentioned the significance in this connection of the contrasting lyrics “The Human Abstract” and “The Divine Image.” The destruction of the appearance of this world must precede the vision of the same world purified, and, subject and object being inseparable, the Selfhood must be annihilated before the true self can appear.

Now all the kindly and honest people who act as though they believed evil to be neither necessary nor desirable are on the right side. But an honest man is not quite the noblest work of God until the faith by which the just live develops into full imaginative vision. The fully imaginative man is therefore a visionary whose imaginative activity is prophecy and whose perception produces art. These two are the same thing, perception being an act.

Those whose minds are befuddled with the two contradictory notions of mystery and necessity, derived from reflecting on space and time respectively, will naturally think of a prophet as someone with a mysterious knack of foretelling an inevitable future. This is exactly what the prophet cannot be. The “seer” has insight, not second sight: he is not a charlatan but the contrary of one, an honest man with a sharper perception and a clearer perspective than other honest men possess. The imagination in seeing a bird sees through it an “immense world of delight”; the imagination in looking at society not only sees its hypocrisies but sees through them, and sees an infinitely better world. The prophet can see an infinite and eternal reality, but nobody can see an indefinite future, except conditionally:

Prophets, in the modern sense of the word, have never existed. Jonah was no prophet in the modern sense, for his prophecy of Nineveh failed. Every honest man is a Prophet; he utters his opinion both of private & public matters. Thus: If you go on So, the result is So. He never says, such a thing shall happen let you do what you will. A Prophet is a Seer, not an Arbitrary Dictator.<sup>[5](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn005)</sup>

It is the superior clarity and accuracy of the prophet’s vision that makes him an artist, and that makes the great artist prophetic.

**• 2 •**

TYRANNY is the co-operation of parasite and host; no tyrant maintains himself by force, but by trading on his victims’ fears. So although “A tyrant is the worst disease, and the cause of all others,”<sup>[6](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn006)</sup> the tyrant can at any rate be seen, and the imagination can handle anything that can be seen. It is the sense of the indefinite unseen, acquired by turning away from perception, which is capable of restraining imagination, and, as “everybody hates a king,”<sup>[7](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn007)</sup> he would soon be destroyed if there were no sense of a mysterious power lurking behind him: if, in short, there were no divinity to hedge the king. Tyranny requires a priesthood and a god first, and these make it permanent. Religion has been called the opiate of the people; but religion in its conventionally accepted and socially established form is far more dangerous than any opiate, the effects of which are transitory. As long as we ascribe the real source of tyranny to temporal power we may overthrow that power only to find in the very act of shouting *écrasez l’infâme* that *l’infâme* has quietly attached itself to the new government and we have to begin all over again. As Paul said, in the passage Blake took as a motto for *The Four Zoas:*

For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.<sup>[8](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn008)</sup>

There is only one false religion as there is only one true one; and it has two infallible marks. First, it postulates some kind of God who is unknown and mysterious because he is not inside us but somewhere else: where, only God knows. Second, it preaches submission, acceptance and unquestioning obedience. The sting is in the tail. Religion of this kind being invented only to buttress the *status quo*, it is always “State Religion, which is the source of all Cruelty.”<sup>[9](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn009)</sup> This is seen in its clearest form in the worship of a deified Caesar, but subtler tyrants have preferred various kinds of loyal disguise. Blake says for instance of Bacon’s *Essays:*

Everybody knows that this is epicurism and libertinism, and yet everybody says that it is Christian philosophy. How is this possible? Everybody must be a liar and deceiver? No! “Everybody” does not do this; but the hirelings of Kings and Courts, who made themselves “everybody,” and knowingly propagate falsehood.<sup>[10](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn010)</sup>

Besides, the anti-imaginative structure must be made as complete as possible, for the imagination is always finding holes in it; in fact, it is always finding it transparent. As that same Bacon remarked, truth comes more easily from error than from confusion. It is the business of imagination to force all falsehood into a denial of truth, to show error as error, to clarify it by reducing the neutral ground. False or state religion has thus altered its forms in the course of centuries, not because it is capable in itself of any development, but because it has had to meet the increasing comprehensiveness of the imagination which has followed the work of the prophets and Jesus. We have already seen how Blake regarded Deism as a consolidation of error which indicated an imminent final rejection of it.

In the unfallen world objects of perception are alive and intelligent; and a faint echo of the animation of that world survives in the animism of primitive religion. The nymphs, satyrs and fauns of Classical mythology are older and more authentic than the Olympian hierarchy. With the separation of existence and perception, however, the natural object became attached to the latter and its spirit or Genius to the former, so that gradually a belief in invisible deities grew up. The eleventh plate of *The Marriage of Heaven and Hell*, the paragraph beginning “The ancient Poets animated all sensible objects with Gods or Geniuses,” traces this process with a clarity that might impress even a modern student of the subject. In the later poems Blake contrasts the “fairies” of the more original belief with the “heathen gods” who succeeded them.<sup>[11](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn011)</sup> These gods were invariably selfish and cruel, as a God whose interests do not run counter to those of man cannot be invoked in support of a tyranny. Ovid shows them particularly interested in stifling and suppressing the artists who attempted to rival them (*i.e.*, create better gods), as in the stories of Marsyas and Arachne.

It is in the God of official Christianity, however, invented as a homeopathic cure for the teachings of Jesus, that state religion has produced its masterpiece. This God is good and we are evil; yet, though he created us, he is somehow or other not responsible for our being evil, though he would consider it blasphemous either to assert that he is or to deny his omnipotence. All calamities and miseries are his will, and to that will we must be absolutely resigned even in thought and desire. The powers that be are ordained of him, and all might is divine right. The visions of artists and prophets are of little importance to him: he did not ordain those, but an invariable ritual and a set of immovable dogmas, which are more in keeping with his ideas of order. Both of these are deep mysteries, to be entrusted to a specially initiated class of servants. He keeps a grim watch over everything men do, and will finally put most of them in hell to scream eternally in torment, eternally meaning, of course, endlessly in time. A few, however, who have done as they have been told, that is, have done nothing creative, will be granted an immortality of the “pie in the sky when you die” variety.

It is easy to call this popular misunderstanding, but perhaps harder to deny that orthodox religion is founded on a compromise with it. If God moves in a mysterious way, a mysterious God *may* be capable of anything. And as all mysteries are nightmares, this one increases in horror the longer we continue to think of what he *may* do to us. But as only the worst of men would torture other men in hell endlessly, given the power, those who believe God does this worship the devil, or the worst elements in man. And this devil takes his duties as Prince of this world very seriously. In practice he is far worse than his most devoted admirer would dare admit. In practice all established Churches are irrevocably committed to the defense of their establishment, and any time of crisis shows clearly that, as far as the orthodox are concerned:

God is only an Allegory of Kings & nothing Else…. God is The Ghost of the Priest & King, who Exist, whereas God exists not except from their Effluvia.<sup>[12](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn012)</sup>

In early days this God had a hankering for human blood, for he would naturally regard suicide or murder as the most reverent homage that could be paid to him. The Old Testament shows him grudgingly retiring under pressure of the prophets and being forced to content himself with murdered animals, but the feeling that human sacrifice is the ultimate gesture of respect still persists, and periodically causes holy wars and crusades. This creature Blake calls, outside the prophecies, “Old Nobodaddy,” and here he is, contemplating the French Revolution:

The King awoke on his couch of gold,

As soon as he heard these tidings told: …

Then he swore a great & *solemn* Oath:

“To kill the people I am loth,

But If they rebel, they must go to hell:

They shall have a Priest & a passing bell.”

Then old Nobodaddy aloft

Farted & belch’d & cough’d,

And said, “I love hanging & drawing & quartering

Every bit as well as war & slaughtering.

Damn praying & singing,

Unless they will bring in

The blood of ten thousand by fighting or swinging.”<sup>[13](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn013)</sup>

Although this God is personal, there is a recurrent tendency to think of him as impersonal. He constantly relapses into Fate or Necessity as soon as his pretensions are examined at all seriously. Being a mere shadow of the tyrant’s demand that we submit passively to him whatever we think or want to do, and not having any more intelligible program of obedience (even the ten commandments only tell us what we must *not* do), Nobodaddy turns out to be much like our old friend the immanent Will. Perfect obedience to him would be unconscious and automatic, like the circling of the stars. The believers in him tell us that the whole universe obeys God in this way except us, and that we do not because we are evil and have fallen. Well, so we have; but the fatal mistake in orthodox thought comes at the next step. All good comes from God, and as, the orthodox say, God is not man, man must be “simple & yet capable of evil.” Such a man must, therefore, look “beyond” the human world for salvation, and there is nothing beyond the human world except the spatial beyond which is nature, and which suggests all these ideas of uncritical docility. Hence routine and passive life comes to be thought good; all that is independent, free and energetic comes to be associated with evil.

This exaltation of the routine and the passive is congenial to all forms of fatalism, among which Blake puts predestination, because they assert that we are not to do what we can in this world but what we must. The same idea is enforced in society by law. Law at its best is impartial; it assumes equality among all men, and so exactly corresponds to the equality of dullness which asserts that only the guinea-sun can “really” be seen. In other words, it puts normality at the lower limit just as Lockian philosophy does. Every real thing contains within it its unique law of growth and coherence, and hence “One Law for the Lion & Ox is Oppression,”<sup>[14](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn014)</sup> just as one idea of proportion to cover them both is nonsense. A generalizing law permits of no exceptions, but everything that lives is an exception to it. Penal laws are based on the assumption that the “general” interest must be preserved, and preserved by compulsion. Therefore they “court Transgression.”<sup>[15](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn015)</sup>

The worship of mediocrity goes much further than this. Greek ethics, for instance, is based on a hesitation and diffidence which is designed not to alter social conditions. Blake wrote such aphorisms as “The road of excess leads to the palace of wisdom”<sup>[16](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn016)</sup> with one eye on the Greek “Nothing in excess.” Prudence is defined by Blake as “a rich, ugly old maid courted by Incapacity,” and in the prophecies he speaks of the four Classical virtues as the four pillars of Satan’s throne.<sup>[17](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn017)</sup> But official Christianity is no better; it too tells us that humility and modesty are great virtues, and that in exalting oneself above a certain level there is grave danger, for anything that might attract the attention of the Setebos-God it worships is sure to exasperate him. This corresponds to the experimental scientist’s teaching that we should reserve judgment and not commit ourselves to anything until we are sure of being well within the guinea-sun conception of reality. Hence Blake says not only:

If the Sun & Moon should doubt,

They’d immediately Go out.

but also:

Humility is only doubt,

And does the Sun & Moon blot out.<sup>[18](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn018)</sup>

All moral virtue of this kind ends in lugubrious and portentous dullness.

If such a morality were based on nothing more than expediency, it would be bad enough, but at least it would relate only to particular actions. This uncomplicated denial of imagination might, however, expose its reactionary basis a little too clearly. It is safer to fall back on the original point that all good is from God and all evil from man, that the former is symbolized by routine obedience and the latter by independence. When this idea is pressed a little, it becomes obvious that all activity is really evil and hence the passive and inert is the good. We are back again at the idea of negative perfection. A negatively perfect God, we said, a God who is pure goodness, can do nothing. A negatively perfect man is in the same dilemma.

“Everything that lives is holy,”<sup>[19](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn019)</sup> and as long as we equate good and evil with life and death, the words mean something. But adjusting one’s life to a normal level of the kind recommended by moral virtue is no more “good” than any other form of fashionable self-mutilation, such as foot-binding or waist-pinching. The morally good man tries to obey an external God instead of bringing out the God in himself. The external God being only the shadow of Caesar, the good man finds himself obeying the latter instead. Caesar being only the shadow of popular timidity, the good man finds himself in the end doing what everyone else does. Morality as such is slave morality. That is what the Bible means when it says that while man was in Eden he possessed the tree of life, but when he turned to the tree of the knowledge of good and evil he found that he had the tree of death:

By this it will be seen that I do not consider either the Just or the Wicked to be in a Supreme State, but to be every one of them States of the Sleep which the Soul may fall into in its deadly dreams of Good & Evil when it leaves Paradise following the Serpent…. The Combats of Good & Evil is Eating of the Tree of Knowledge. The Combats of Truth & Error is Eating of the Tree of Life.<sup>[20](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn020)</sup>

The conception of the saving power of God held by orthodox Christians would be correct if it were not worked out in terms of an antithesis of divine and human wills rather than a unity of divine and human imagination. “If man,” Blake asks, “is consider’d as only evil & god only good, how then is regeneration effected which turns the evil to good?”<sup>[21](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn021)</sup> The power of becoming our own best selves must be within us: there can be no oracles to approach and no incantations to memorize. Satan in the Bible is called *diabolos* or accuser because he is forever reminding man of his own insufficiency and causing him to despair of deliverance, and his henchmen spread throughout society the state of mind called by Blake the “accusation of sin,” the final triumph of the death-impulse, the complete torpor and paralysis of the mind.

For Satan is not himself a sinner but a self-righteous prig. As Blake explains:

We do not find any where that Satan is Accused of Sin; he is only accused of Unbelief & thereby drawing Man into Sin that he may accuse him.<sup>[22](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn022)</sup>

As long as God is conceived as a bloodthirsty bully this priggishness takes the form of persecution and heresy-hunting as a service acceptable to him. But we saw that under examination Old Nobodaddy soon vanishes into a mere perpetual-motion machine of causation. And as Deism is an isolation of what is abstract and generalized in Christianity, Satan in Blake’s day has become a Deist, and has turned to subtler forms of persecution, to ridicule and shoulder-shrugging and pointing out contemptuously how little evidence there is for any kind of reality except, that of natural law.

Yet Deism professed to be in part a revolutionary force. The American and French revolutions were largely Deist-inspired, and both appeared to Blake to be genuinely imaginative upheavals. He wrote poems warmly sympathizing with both, hoping that they were the beginning of a world-wide revolt that would begin his apocalypse. He met and liked Tom Paine, and respected his honesty as a thinker. Yet Paine could write in his *Age of Reason:*

I had some turn, and I believe some talent for poetry; but this I rather repressed than encouraged, as leading too much into the field of imagination.

The attitude to life implied by such a remark can have no permanent revolutionary vigor, for underlying it is the weary materialism which asserts that the deader a thing is the more trustworthy it is; that a rock is a solid reality and that the vital spirit of a living man is a rarefied and diaphanous ghost. It is no accident that Paine should say in the same book that God can be revealed only in mechanics, and that a mill is a microcosm of the universe. A revolution based on such ideas is not an awakening of the spirit of man: if it kills a tyrant, it can only replace him with another, as the French Revolution swung from Bourbon to Bonaparte. And if it abolishes tyrants altogether, it can only do so by establishing a tyranny of custom so powerful that the tyrant will not be necessary, as in the ant-republic. An inadequate mental attitude to liberty can think of it only as a leveling-out. Democracy of this sort is a placid ovine herd of self-satisfied mediocrities. Blake watched this tendency growing as he became more disillusioned with the French and American revolutions, and at the end of his life he was still protesting:

But since the French Revolution Englishmen are all intermeasurable by one another: certainly a happy state of agreement, in which I for one do not agree.<sup>[23](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn023)</sup>

The difference between the Deist and the Blakean ideas of a free and democratic society corresponds again to the difference between the guinea-sun and the angelic sun. In Deism there is not only the belief that the physical world is the only real one, but also a feeling of satisfaction at remaining within it, a certain enthusiasm about accepting the conditions it imposes. Now it seems reasonable enough to take the world as we find it, trying to be as contented in it as possible, and make others so, without straining after more elusive pleasures, perhaps less substantial ones. But if it were possible to do this the human race would have settled into Utopian serenity centuries ago. It remains true that the physical world is not good enough for the imagination to accept, and if we do accept it we are left with our Selfhoods, our verminous crawling egos that spend all their time either wronging others or brooding on wrongs done to them. The end of all natural religion, however well-meaning and good-natured, is a corrupt and decadent society rolling downhill to stampeding mass hysteria and maniacal warfare. This is the historical succession to Deism which Blake in *Jerusalem* symbolizes as “Druidism,” for reasons to be explained in due course.

If there is greater imaginative power in the revolutionary impulse, it is not so much because of what it accomplishes as because of what it is in itself. Revolution is always an attempt to smash the structure of tyranny and create a better world, even when revolutionaries do not understand what creation implies or what a better world is. The apocalypse will necessarily begin with a slaughter of tyrants, and Christ came, Blake says, to deliver those bound under the knave, not to deliver the knave.<sup>[24](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn024)</sup> Later on we shall trace in greater detail the waning of Blake’s interest in the revolutionary movements of his time: all we need to say just now is that for Blake the central problem of social and political liberty is the release of imagination. Hence the initial stage in attaining this, for Blake as for Milton before him and for Carlyle and others after him, is to establish the role of the great man in society. The goal of prophecy is the Messiah, the divine man. This involves the question of the nature of the great man: we shall see later why to Blake the great man can be only the visionary prophetic artist, never the Carlylean hero or the Nietzschean Superman. Society is best off when it is sufficiently aware of its own defects to let the prophet scold it, and the “honest man” say what he likes.

**• 3 •**

THEREFORE the real war in society is the “Mental Fight” between the visionaries and the champions of tyranny. The latter are not the tyrants themselves but visionary renegades: poets like Virgil who write for Caesar; philosophers who “teach doubt & Experiment”<sup>[25](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn025)</sup>; generalizing painters like Titian and Rubens; theological apologists of Nobodaddy. As they are guardians of society and moral virtue, Blake calls them “Angels”; for those who, like himself, call the whole structure of society in question there is no word but “Devils.” Angels, though wrong, are essential to imagination, for the reason given above, that the basis of tyranny is not error but confusion. Those who really believe in tyranny and work out a coherent defense of it clarify confusion into error and thereby demonstrate its opposite to be true. The uses to society of the Devil and the Angel, Blake says, are about equal, because “to be an Error & to be Cast out is a part of God’s design.”<sup>[26](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn026)</sup> Hence there must be in society a continuous fight between radical and conservative imagination. “Without Contraries is no progression,”<sup>[27](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn027)</sup> but this is the only kind of contrariety that can progress. Blake, in dealing with artists he considers Angels, lays about him with the destructive fury of a Friar John, without stopping to think whether he is being unfair to them or not. They can take care of themselves. Blake is engaged in “intellectual War”<sup>[28](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn028)</sup>; he thinks of his state of Eden as an eternal Valhalla of conflicts waged with bows of burning gold and arrows of desire.

But attacking Angels is only part of the prophet’s work; another part is concerned with the conquering of neutrals. These are not strong enough to fight, because they are victims of revenge-morality.  For those who live under the curse of the law see in every vigorous act the uncompleted half of a movement toward inertia, to be followed and neutralized at once by its opposite. Hence revenge or attack comes to be a typical response to activity. And as retribution tends to the neutralizing of activity, retribution is not only bad in itself but a waste of time. Wars, penal codes and persecutions never become positive acts; and while they will always exist as long as the world is fallen, they are never more than the endless working-out of a decimal proved millenniums ago to be recurring.

The first step in escaping from this is the complete renunciation of all the forms of punishment which are so dear to the Selfhood. “Forgiveness of sins” is a cardinal principle with Blake, the antidote for the “accusation of sins” which poisons the imagination. Forgiveness of this sort implies three things. First, a previous condemnation. “Severity of judgment is a great virtue,”<sup>[29](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn029)</sup> said Blake: all sins (manifestations of hindrance or restraint) should be violently resented and denounced by the visionary. Weak and lazy people who are not actually being frightened at the moment tend to lose all interest in such matters under the guise of a good-humored tolerance, and in these moods of comparative courage they feel that the importance of sin is greatly exaggerated. It is very different when they do become frightened, for then they at once begin to point to others and scream to have them destroyed. But it is now the visionary’s turn to be tolerant. As all vengeance is evil and as “the voice of honest indignation is the voice of God,”<sup>[30](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn030)</sup> resentment and retribution are irreconcilable. Punishing a man strengthens society; strengthening society is strengthening mediocrity. The second step in forgiveness is the separation of the man from his sin, and the third the release of the imaginative power which makes this possible. The prophet, who wants to be delivered from evil, denounces the condition the man is in; society, which wants only to be delivered from the inconveniences attached to evil, denounces the man only. The prophetic vision is focused on a Messiah or incarnation of God; the mediocre or guinea-sun vision is focused on a scapegoat:

In Hell all is Self Righteousness; there is no such thing there as Forgiveness of Sin; he who does Forgive Sin is Crucified as an Abettor of Criminals, & he who performs Works of Mercy in Any shape whatever is punish’d &, if possible, destroy’d, not thro’ envy or Hatred or Malice, but thro’ Self Righteousness that thinks it does God service, which God is *Satan*.<sup>[31](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn031)</sup>

The visionary is characterized by the two emotions of wrath and pity, called by Blake Rintrah and Palamabron. The former is peculiar to him. The Angel cannot feel the honest indignation which is the voice of God: he may simulate it to the point of deceiving himself, but there will always be a concealed selfish reason for expressing it. On the other hand, he is not always merciless; he may think of punishment as necessary and regret the necessity. Necessity is the tyrant’s plea, not love of punishment. (The point here is not that punishment is never necessary, but that if it is necessary it is therefore not free, and indicates the failure of society to achieve freedom.) Blake says in the prophecies that Satan has the science of pity but not the science of wrath.<sup>[32](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn032)</sup> The prophet may flail his enemies with a haughty and arrogant contempt; this is the *saeva indignatio* of Rintrah which begins *The Marriage of Heaven and Hell.* But behind this is not only the prophet’s infinite tenderness for the weak and foolish, but his own sense of exceptional responsibility and of the exceptional infamy of deserting his work:

But if we fear to do the dictates of our Angels, & tremble at the Tasks set before us; if we refuse to do Spiritual Acts because of Natural Fears or Natural Desires! Who can describe the dismal torments of such a state!—I too well remember the Threats I heard!—“If you, who are organized by Divine Providence for spiritual communion, Refuse, & bury your Talent in the Earth, even tho’ you should want Natural Bread, Sorrow & Desperation pursues you thro’ life, & after death shame & confusion of face to eternity….<sup>[33](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn033)</sup>

A man who writes like this does not write difficult poetry to relieve his private feelings or mock a sympathetic reader, though perhaps we are beyond this stage by now. But while Blake lays a heavy emphasis on the didactic nature and social impact of art, he has nothing of that distrust of the ability of art to carry its own message which has spoiled many conscientious prophets. The visionary is disinterested because his vision is clear and accurate, and if his presentation of that vision is perfect in form he has done all he can. He cannot construct an inferior kind of art or prophecy for weaker people. On the other hand he may practice self-denial without restricting his imaginative development: if he thinks poverty a social evil he is not inconsistent if he remains poor in order to say so.

The fight between Devils and Angels is a fight between the two opposed principles of self-development and Selfhood, and because each springs from the self the latter may speak the language of the former and imitate its processes. This struggle is carried on in all four imaginative states, Eden, Beulah, Generation and Ulro.

**• 4 •**

IN Eden the two fundamental processes of the imagination, Blake says, are war and hunting; that is, struggle and search, perverted here into different kinds of murder. In the unfallen world the creative joy of the artist expands into that of the Creator God twisting the sinews of the tiger’s heart; that of the exploring scientist into the vision of the Titan Orc piercing into “the Elemental Planets & the orbs of eccentric fire.”

It is difficult for the man without a genuine apocalyptic, we have said, to understand that such virtues as mercy, pity, peace and love are not mere palliatives of antecedent evils and do not exist by virtue of them. We know good by evil in this world: when we try to think of “Good by itself and Evil not at all,” in spite of ourselves we think of the protected child’s world. The Bible, Milton, even the Bunyan whose idea of mental warfare was so courageous, tend to describe Heaven in terms of protection, relaxation and peace. Blake suggests that an eternal joy is a positive thing, an achievement in a world of gratified desire. But when we try to visualize this world, does not Paradise become a mere kindergarten in which we may run and play as we like, with knives and boiling water carefully put out of our reach? Without *risk* would not the highest kind of pleasure be apt to pall? If twisting a tiger’s heart in the next world is as dangerous as twisting his tail in this one, the Creator may well smile if he wins out; but surely a world in which the lion is said to lie down with the lamb is a world of stuffed lions.

Hence, it may be argued, the great men in this world are not only the great creators but the great destroyers or conquerors as well; the heroes whom Blake would consider not great men but great nuisances, or great epidemics. For danger leads to domination,  in thought as in etymology. Lordship among other creators, then, would be nobler than the merely secure lordship over creatures, and the Napoleons of this world symbolize the fact. Thus Nietzsche’s realization that man is something to be surpassed led him to celebrate struggle, or will to power, rather than conquest, conquest in this world being often an anticlimax.

But to Blake all energy is creative, all creation of one Creator, and all energy exists only in form, or fulfillment. God can no more strive with God than Satan can cast out Satan, much less destroy or subdue God. A “master race” would be more locked up in gloomy spiritual solitude than ever: the “will to power” never escapes from time, and therefore never loses the sense of the eternal and infinite as ironic, because forever elusive. When we see that all men are part of the larger body of a single Man we can also see that only the pleasure of creation is real, and that creation is the only outcome of conflict which satisfies the imagination. The pleasure of mastery is morbid, and the pleasure of danger a gambler’s delirium. Perhaps the use of this word “pleasure” confuses the issue: Blake does not often use it, and it is in fact rather a passive and receptive word. The poet who said that “Active Evil is better than Passive Good”<sup>[34](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn034)</sup> might well have said that active pain is better than passive pleasure, in which case he would have come much closer to Nietzsche, or even to the sadists he is sometimes confused with. Blake does not talk about pleasure and pain, but about joy and sorrow, which are words that do mean something; and eternity to him is simply that plane of existence on which joy, or the fulfillment of desire, becomes possible. The absence of joy in Nietzsche’s philosophy would put him on the side of the Angels for Blake.

• 5 •

THE natural man who attempts the state of Beulah or love is in a state of “jealousy.” The abstract reasoner cannot see a tree without dragging its shadow off to the cave of his own mind, and a post-Blakean myth of great imaginative accuracy shows that the attitude of the natural or “cave” man to his wife is not greatly different. The Selfhood cannot love in the sense of establishing a kinship with the beloved: it can regard the latter only as a possession, something to contemplate in solitude. These irreconcilable attitudes to love are represented in “The Clod and the Pebble” in the *Songs of Experience.* Mastery over woman produces the same morbidity and imaginative idleness as mastery over man, and Blake uses the word “jealousy” to cover the Selfhood’s attitude to both.

Abstract ideas are called spectres by Blake, and Spectre with a capital letter is the Selfhood. The corresponding term is “Emanation,” which means the total form of all the things a man loves and creates. In the fallen states the Emanation is conceived as outside, and hence it becomes the source of a continuously tantalizing and elusive torment. In imaginative states it is united with and emanates from the man, hence its name. The imagination, therefore, achieves a single spiritual union, which is why monogamous marriage, the fallen approximation of it, has got itself so firmly established in society. Of course the legal and ecclesiastical idea of marriage as a trap baited with the sex act and snapped at consummation Blake, like Milton, thought obscene. His warnings, however, are not directed against marriage but against the “soft Family-Love”<sup>[35](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn035)</sup> which is one of the most formidable bulwarks of social conservatism. The notion that a child is a possession of its parents is very hard to eradicate, especially in loving parents; and this kind of parental love is denounced by Blake as a vicious appetite. The most elaborate form of it is the Platonic educational love which has for its goal the retention of the boy in the larger family unit of the city-state.<sup>[36](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn036)</sup>

Sexual love, however, is the door through which most of us enter the imaginative world, and for many it affords the sole glimpse into that world. It is thus especially pathetic when a chance to love is thwarted or missed, and especially important for the Selfhood to place a strong guard over this door to send enquirers in the wrong direction. This door, the guard says, does not lead to fuller humanity; it goes the opposite way to nature. This is the “animal” or lower part of you that you are now exploring, and is a form of excretion which the loftiest spirituality cuts out of life entirely.

The guard is lying, of course. Mating and copulating may be “animal,” but imaginative love is part of our divine birthright. The whole notion of shame which the guard inspires is typical of Selfhood “jealousy,” and it breeds several different diseases, all closely related. Blake did not need to survive to this century to learn that prudery and prurience are much the same thing, or that there can be a good deal of autoerotic frustration in virginity. He makes both points with great explicitness all through his work, as in this plaintive lament of a dead spinster:

An old maid early—e’er I knew

Ought but the love that on me grew;

And now I’m cover’d o’er & o’er

And wish that I had been a whore.<sup>[37](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn037)</sup>

Sexual abstinence is more melodramatic than autoeroticism: Nobodaddy is a jealous God, and the killing of love is as dear to him as the killing of life, which, of course, it includes. Here again the myth of a higher “soul” and a lower “body” rears its foolish head. The latter, we are told, is “tainted” and “corrupt”; the former becomes “pure” when separated from the body and purged of fleshly desires. As the body *is* the soul seen from the perspective of this world, it is easy to see how murderous this denial of those simple desires which are imaginative needs must be. Blake has put this into his terrible lyric on the sunflower in the *Songs of Experience*, the flower which wistfully follows the sun across the sky all day, a perfect symbol of the “vegetable” life rooted in this world and longing to be free. But all the *Songs of Experience* are deeply acid-bitten, and even the “pale Virgin shrouded in snow” is not so tragic a figure of useless imaginative waste as the harlot.<sup>[38](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn038)</sup> Society is never so self-righteous as when accusing the harlot of sin and doing nothing to free her from it, yet she is an inevitable result of its own blaspheming of love, and the plagues which blight the marriage hearse are no more an accidental result of that blasphemy than violent death is an accidental result of war.

The elaborate erotic apparatus of more respectable females, coyness, shyness, modesty, jealousy, teasing, luring the man on and then holding him off, concealing and revealing the body at once, and so on, are not to be dismissed as either silly or amusing: they are, like marriage, symbols of a profound imaginative reality. The material world is in a way feminine to the perceiver; it is the body which receives the seed of his imagination, and the works of the imagination which are the artist’s children are drawn from that body. We think of Nature as feminine, and so she is. But as the artist develops he becomes more and more interested in the art and more and more impatient of the help he receives from nature. In the world of Eden there is only energy incorporating itself in form, creator and creature, which means that somewhere (on the upper limit of Beulah, as it happens) this permanent objective body which nourishes and incubates the imaginative form drops out. Nature, in simpler language, is Mother Nature, and in the perfectly imaginative state there is no mother. The fall of man began with the appearance of an independent object-world, and continued into this state of Generation, where we begin life in helpless dependence on Mother Nature for all our ideas. This independent nourishing force in nature Blake calls the female will.

The worship of a female principle, therefore, specifically a maternal principle, is not imaginative, and is only possible to natural religion. In Eden there is no Mother-God. In many religions God is certainly worshiped as a trinity of father, mother and child, as in Beulah, but in the more highly developed ones God is always the Supreme Male, the Creator for whom the distinction between the beloved female and created child has disappeared. The reappearance of the Madonna in Christianity is thus a corruption of that religion, and is in direct contradiction to Jesus’ own teachings. Mother-worship is womb-worship, a desire to prolong the helplessness of the perceiver and his dependence on the body of nature which surrounds him.

Women are of course the only possible images of the female will in this world, though it does not follow that they are to be identified with it. All female-worship is disguised nature-worship, and all Petrarchan and chivalric codes directed to the adoration of a mistress are imaginatively pernicious for that reason. The female antics mentioned above which have degenerated from these codes reproduce, in the fallen world, the elusive and treacherous beauty of a separate nature; and the separation of nature from man, which drives him from reflection to melancholy, and from melancholy to suicidal madness, has usually been symbolized in art by the love, or rather jealousy, of a viciously willful woman. In Blake’s symbolism the two great symbols of the female will are the Madonna and Child, the infant imagination wrapped in the arms of a mother, and the Court of Love code with its curious reversal of sexual roles in which a coy mistress is the “lord.”

**• 6 •**

THE more mundane struggles of the visionary in the world of Generation are largely concerned with money. Money to Blake is the cement or cohesive principle of fallen society, and as society consists of tyrants exploiting victims, money can exist only in the two forms of riches and poverty; too much for a few and not enough for the rest. *La propriété, c’est le vol* may be a good epigram, but it is no better than Blake’s definition of money as “the life’s blood of Poor Families,”<sup>[39](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn039)</sup> or his remark that “God made Man happy & Rich, but the Subtil made the innocent, Poor.”<sup>[40](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn040)</sup> A money economy is a continuous partial murder of the victim, as poverty keeps many imaginative needs out of reach. Money for those who have it, on the other hand, can belong only to the Selfhood, as it assumes the possibility of enjoyment through possession, which we have seen to be impossible; and hence of being passively or externally stimulated into imagination. An equal distribution of money, even if practicable, would therefore not affect its status as the root of all evil. Corresponding to the consensus of mediocrities assumed by law and Lockian philosophy, money assumes a dead level of “necessities” (notice the word) as its basis. Art on this theory is high up among the nonessentials; pleasure, in society, tends to collapse very quickly into luxury and affectation.

Peace is this money economy functioning; war is the same economy breaking down, and proceeding from partial to total murder of the victim. Blake speaks of “Heroism a Miser,”<sup>[41](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn041)</sup> meaning that wars are fought to get money and that brave deeds in battle therefore go to enrich profiteers. Or, to put it in words of one syllable:

The Prince’s Robes & Beggar’s Rags

Are Toadstools on the Miser’s Bags.<sup>[42](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn042)</sup>

Into this money economy the visionary must fit himself somehow, and he usually finds that integrity and prosperity point in very different directions. Society on the whole does not want him, and occasionally tells him that he ought to be poor and thereby suffer enough to make himself a great genius. “Poverty is the Fool’s Rod,”<sup>[43](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn043)</sup> said Blake; nor did he care for the other view, which he died too soon to feel the real force of, that a visionary must present a socially acceptable morality first and his visions afterwards. Not that Blake is any great exponent of *la vie de Bohème*, but, as he says, an artist cannot be dissipated unless he has something to dissipate.<sup>[44](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn044)</sup>

**• 7 •**

COMING down to Ulro we reach the problem skirted around in the first chapter of the difference between the imaginative and the imaginary, between the vision and the hallucination. This contrast is a perfectly valid one, but usually it is wrongly stated on an assumption of separate subjects and objects. Either the thing seen is thought to be “outside” the mind and real, or “inside,” in which case it is “just imagination,” and unreal. But this distinction does not work, and the question may be argued for centuries whether ghosts, for instance, are objectively real or subjectively unreal without being settled.

Now whether we “really” see something or just “imagine” we see it, the thing visualized is in both cases equally a datum of experience. But two mental attitudes to perception are possible. The way of what we have called the normal genius is imaginative, divine, universal, and therefore communicable; what cannot be communicated is not imagined but derived from reflection. Further, the unfallen world is infinite and eternal, and what exists in that world persists in this one. This persistent reality is the basis of all vision. Superficially, the vision of Quixote, who saw a windmill as a hundred-armed giant, is very similar to the vision of Blake:

For double the vision my Eyes do see,

And a double vision is always with me.

With my inward Eye ’tis an Old Man grey;

With my outward, a Thistle across my way.<sup>[45](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn045)</sup>

But in seeing the giant Quixote lost his imaginative control of the windmill.

When the diseased or lunatic mind has what it calls visions, the latter have certain characteristics which do not appear in those of the visionary. In the first place, they are consistent only with a series of associations peculiar to the individual, and only in terms of that have they any communicable value. They can therefore seldom produce the imaginative response in us that Blake’s vision of the sun as a company of angels does, when he illustrates it in the Job series. In the second place, they are haphazard, and appear and vanish in defiance of the imaginative will. In the third place, they are evil and monstrous, corresponding to the Selfhood’s fears of what may exist outside perception, and to the generalizations in which various real things are mixed together.

The response of the Selfhood to vision, therefore, is the same as its response to sight. In responding to sight it withdraws and reflects; in responding to vision it runs away and hides under the bedclothes. In responding to sight it is passively affected by an external stimulus; in responding to vision it is haunted and pursued by some external power conceived as both irresistible and evil. The imagination, on the other hand, makes the ghost perceived by it the slave of a sketchbook. Spirits of all kinds appeared to Blake, but only as unpaid models; they were forced to stand around and pose, open their mouths to display their teeth better, and were not allowed to depart before he had finished with them on any such thin excuse as the necessity of getting away at cockcrow.

We may notice that in all four areas of imaginative conflict the Selfhood sets up a parody of the imagination. The physical fight of the hero parodies the mental fight of the artist; the jealous wife and teasing mistress parody the emanation; money and morality parody the community of minds; the ghost or nightmare parodies the vision. This pattern of superficial resemblance combined with profound contrast, the illustration of the doctrine that truth clarifies error into the negation of itself, reaches its culmination in the parody of Christ by Antichrist. Our next task is to describe Blake’s conception of Jesus, in which our main source must be *The Everlasting Gospel.*

**• 8 •**

THE Holy Spirit spoke by the prophets, all visionaries speak with the voice of God, but in Jesus God and Man became one. For Jesus was a perfect man, not in the negative sense of a man without sin—had he been perfect in that way he could never have existed at all, even as a myth—but as a man who “was all virtue, and acted from impulse, not from rules.”<sup>[46](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn046)</sup> Everything he did was an imaginative act bringing more abundant life, and his whole gospel reduces itself to forgiveness of sins, in the sense above discussed.

His impact on society was that of a revolutionary and iconoclast, as that of all prophets must be. He found the Jews worshiping their own version of Nobodaddy, a sulky and jealous thundergod who exacted the most punctilious obedience to a ceremonial law and moral code. He tore this code to pieces and broke all ten commandments, in theory at least. He had no use for the Pharisees’ Sabbath or for the paralysis of activity thought to be most acceptable to their frozen God on that day. All the devotion to ritual fopperies of the kind that lazy minds think of as possessing some kind of mysterious magical virtue got the same treatment. Jesus met the guardians of law and conventional piety with jeers and insults and merciless exposures of their hypocrisy and ignorance. He started disputing with doctors very early, and reduced both the smugly pious Pharisees and the smugly skeptical Sadducees to an infuriated silence. He himself was a vagrant and did not work at his trade, giving the bag to Judas to carry, but he never ceased to denounce the ambitious and self-made as fools and swindlers. So far from honoring his father and mother—the only positive command in the Decalogue—he found that complete imagination involves a break with a family. He ran away from home at twelve, told his followers that they must hate their parents, and said to his own mother, “Woman, what have I to do with thee?”<sup>[47](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn047)</sup> When he was brought a harlot to be accused, condemned and murdered in the approved way, he showed that the self-righteousness which made killing her a pleasure was something far worse than her sin. Finally Jesus became so obnoxious to society that society could stand him no longer, and, as he refused all compromise or even defense, he really compelled the custodians of virtue and vested interests to murder him. From their point of view they were quite right, and their charge of blaspheming their God amply justified.

At the same time the common people heard him gladly; publicans and sinners welcomed him; lepers, pariahs and beggars called to him; children swarmed after him. He was more interested in sinners than the righteous; Pharisees did not recognize him as a prophet, but the adulterous woman of Samaria did. When he talked of God he did not point to the sky but told his hearers that the Kingdom of Heaven was within them. Nor did he tell them how to live a Christian life in society. He asked the impossible, demanded perfection, and threw out wildly unpractical suggestions. He said that God was a Father and that we should live the imaginatively unfettered lives of children, growing as spontaneously as the lilies without planning or foresight. The God of his parables is an imaginative God who makes no sense whatever as a Supreme Bookkeeper, rewarding the obedient and punishing the disobedient. Those who labor all day for him get the same reward as those who come in at the last moment. His kingdom is like a pearl of great price which it will bankrupt us to possess. If we want wise and temperate advice on living we shall find it in Caesar sooner than in Christ; there is more of it in Marcus Aurelius than there is in the Gospels.<sup>[48](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn048)</sup> Sensible people will tell us that it is foolish to throw everything to the winds, to give all one’s goods to the poor and live entirely without caution or prudence. But they will not tell us the one thing we need most to know: that we are all born into a world of liquid chaos as a man falls into the sea, and that we must either sink or swim to land because we are not fish.

For all Jesus’ teaching centers on the imminent destruction of this world and the eternal permanence of heaven and hell, these latter being not places but states of mind. Jesus however did not discuss this in terms of good and evil, but in terms of life and death, the fruitful and the barren. The law of God that we must obey is the law of our own spiritual growth. Those who embezzle God’s talents are praised; those who are afraid to touch them are reviled.

There is much haughtiness and arrogance in Jesus, much speaking with authority and much blasting invective. This is the indignation of the prophet. Yet we have seen that resentment excludes retribution, and Jesus forgave all sins continuously until his last gasp on the cross. For the same reason he renounced all the attributes of the conquering Messiah, refused to fight tyranny with tyranny, and withdrew completely from the vendettas of society. It is therefore nonsense to believe that Jesus forgave sins only because he was biding his time for a more hideous revenge later on. Hell is the Selfhood “jealousy” defined by Blake as “the being shut up in the possession of corporeal desires which shortly weary the man,”<sup>[49](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn049)</sup> and this is the only hell that Jesus spoke of.

The higher state of heaven is achieved by those who have developed the God within them instead of the devil. Those who have fed the hungry and clothed the naked are here, because they have realized the divine dignity of man. These are the just who, as Paul said, live by faith, and the just, being potentially visionaries, attain that vision after death. Faith, which may be “blind,” attains its consummation in vision, and Jesus promised that some of his followers would not taste death before they had that vision. In other words, it is not necessary to die to get it. Faith, Jesus said, can remove mountains. But mountains in the world of experience are entirely motionless; what kind of faith can remove them? Well, a landscape painter can easily leave one out of his picture if it upsets his imaginative balance. And that kind of vision, which sees with perfect accuracy just what it wants to see, pierces the gates of heaven into the unfallen world.

Jesus was not only a teacher but a healer, and the true healer does not “cure”; he helps the sick man to cure himself. Jesus tore off all the veils of timidity and caution and prudence and moderation and confronted his hearers with the ultimate contrast of full imagination or Selfhood, himself or Caiaphas. He could bring God out of a fisherman or a tax-collector, and he could frighten a weakling until all his hysterias and bugaboos ran shrieking out of him. Therefore he continuously worked what are called miracles. Now just as prophecy is vulgarly considered to be fortune-telling, so miracles are vulgarly considered to be mysterious tricks which cannot be explained except on the assumption that the worker of them is all that he says he is. Miracles of this kind belong to the more popular and ignorant levels of religion: they are a crude form of scientific experiment. The miracles of Jesus depended on the belief of the recipient. A real miracle is an imaginative effort which meets with an imaginative response. Jesus could give sight to the blind and activity to the paralyzed only when they did not want to be blind or paralyzed; he stimulated and encouraged them to shatter their own physical prisons. Miracles reveal what the imagination can do. The opposite of revelation is mystery, and a miracle which remains mysterious is a fraud, especially if it is an authentic miracle:

Jesus could not do miracles where unbelief hindered, hence we must conclude that the man who holds miracles to be ceased puts it out of his own power to ever witness one. The manner of a miracle being performed is in modern times considered as an arbitrary command of the agent upon the patient, but this is an impossibility, not a miracle, neither did Jesus ever do such a miracle….<sup>[50](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn050)</sup>

Jesus’ teaching avoids generalizations of the sort that translate into platitudes in all languages. Examples, images, parables, and the aphorisms which are concretions rather than abstractions of wisdom, were what he preferred. These are the units of art, and are addressed only to those who are willing to understand them; no art works automatically on the unresponsive any more than a miracle does. Coleridge’s “willing suspension of disbelief” is a negative statement of the desire to see which all art implies. Such a desire is simple and childlike rather than complex; but to the generalizer there is nothing so esoteric as a straightforward story which compels him to focus his vision on something concrete. He prefers plain statements of general truth: those, he feels, are addressed to all men equally, like the guinea-sun. He is more at home with “Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth”: that expresses the general truth that one may become rich and respected by not offending anybody:

The Vision of Christ that thou dost see

Is my Vision’s Greatest Enemy: …

Thine is the friend of All Mankind,

Mine speaks in parables to the Blind.<sup>[51](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn051)</sup>

There is no Christian visible Church, Christian theology, Christian morality, Christian society or Christian ceremony. Religion, says Blake, is “Civilized Life such as it is in the Christian Church,”<sup>[52](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn052)</sup> and the Christian Church in this sense is nothing but “Active Life”<sup>[53](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn053)</sup> or the free use of the imagination. Nobody can be “converted” to Christianity in the sense of exchanging one faith for another:

… By their Works ye shall know them; the Knave who is Converted to Deism & the Knave who is Converted to Christianity is still a Knave, but he himself will not know it, tho’ Every body else does.<sup>[54](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn054)</sup>

Imagination is life, and Jesus, by “taking away the remembrance of sin,” released it, bringing more abundant life. He not only judges the quick and the dead; he judges them according to whether they are quick or dead. He did not curse Pilate; he cursed the barren fig-tree. The imagination always follows Jesus, and cannot do otherwise. There is no natural religion; all religion is revelation; revelation is apocalypse; apocalypse is vision. The only “church” Jesus founded was a communion of visionaries, and Baptism and the Lord’s Supper symbolize, Blake says, “Throwing off Error & Knaves from our company continually & Recieving Truth or Wise Men into our Company continually.”<sup>[55](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn055)</sup> The essence of the socially acceptable and moral Antichrist, then, is “the outward Ceremony,”<sup>[56](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn056)</sup> its recurrent ritual imitating the Nobodaddy who chases his tail forever in the sky.

Heaven is not a place guarded by immigration officials interested only in passports and certificates, nor is it the higher class to which we are promoted by passing an examination showing what we have learned in this world. Heaven *is* this world as it appears to the awakened imagination, and those who try to approach it by way of restraint, caution, good behavior, fear, self-satisfaction, assent to uncomprehended doctrines, or voluntary drabness, will find themselves traveling toward hell, as Ignorance did in Bunyan, hell being similarly this world as it appears to the repressed imagination:

Men are admitted into Heaven not because they have curbed & govern’d their Passions or have No Passions, but because they have Cultivated their Understandings. The Treasures of Heaven are not Negations of Passion, but Realities of Intellect, from which all the Passions Emanate Uncurbed in their Eternal Glory. The Fool shall not enter into Heaven let him be ever so Holy. Holiness is not The Price of Enterance into Heaven. Those who are cast out are All Those who, having no Passions of their own because No Intellect, Have spent their lives in Curbing & Governing other People’s by the Various arts of Poverty & Cruelty of all kinds….”<sup>[57](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch03fn057)</sup>

Notice the pejorative use of the term “holiness” in the above passage, which is regular in Blake except in direct connection with the state of innocence. The conception of the holy first stirs in the primitive mind in connection with symbols of an unknown fear; it develops in darkened temples where the “holy place” is guarded and veiled, and matures in a feeling of awful reverence which expresses itself in sacrifice. The term is also associated more loosely with hoary age and the last extremity of moral virtue; but in all its meanings it connotes a mental paralysis founded on mystery, like the “holy dread” of *Kubla Khan.* In the passage quoted above Blake goes on to say, in a blinding flash of contempt, “The Modern Church Crucifies Christ with the Head Downwards.” It is clear that when Blake defines his art as allegory addressed to the intellectual powers, by intellectual powers he must have meant, strained as the interpretation may seem to some, intellectual powers. To his theory of art we must now turn.
