|                              |                            |
|------------------------------|----------------------------|
| 5 | *THE WORD WITHIN THE WORD* |

WHEN we perceive, or rather reflect on, the general, we perceive as an ego: when we perceive as a mental form, or rather create, we perceive as part of a universal Creator or Perceiver, who is ultimately Jesus. Jesus is the Logos or Word of God, the totality of creative power, the universal visionary in whose mind we perceive the particular. But the phrase “Word of God” is obviously appropriate also to all works of art which reveal the same perspective, these latter being recreations of the divine vision which is Jesus. The archetypal Word of God, so to speak, sees this world of time and space as a single creature in eternity and infinity, fallen and redeemed. This is the vision of God (subjective genitive: the vision which God in us has). In this world the Word of God is the aggregate of works of inspired art, the Scripture written by the Holy Spirit which spoke by the prophets. Properly interpreted, all works of art are phases of that archetypal vision. The vision of the Last Judgment, said Blake, “is seen by the Imaginative Eye of Every one according to the situation he holds.”<sup>[1](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn001)</sup> And the greater the work of art, the more completely it reveals the gigantic myth which is the vision of this world as God sees it, the outlines of that vision being creation, fall, redemption and apocalypse.

The Bible is the world’s greatest work of art and therefore has primary claim to the title of God’s Word. It takes in, in one immense sweep, the entire world of experience from the creation to the final vision of the City of God, embracing heroic saga, prophetic vision, legend, symbolism, the Gospel of Jesus, poetry and oratory on the way. It bridges the gap between a lost Golden Age and the time that the Word became flesh and dwelt among us, and it alone gives us the vision of the life of Jesus in this world. For some reason or other the Jews managed to preserve an imaginative tradition which the Greeks and others lost sight of, and possessed only in disguised and allegorical forms. The Classical poets, says Blake:

Assert that Jupiter usurped the Throne of his Father, Saturn, & brought on an Iron Age & Begat on Mnemosyne, or Memory, The Greek Muses, which are not Inspiration as the Bible is. Reality was Forgot, & the Vanities of Time & Space only Remember’d & call’d Reality. Such is the Mighty difference between Allegoric Fable & Spiritual Mystery. Let it here be Noted that the Greek Fables originated in Spiritual Mystery & Real Visions, which are lost & clouded in Fable & Allegory, while the Hebrew Bible & the Greek Gospel are Genuine, Preserv’d by the Saviour’s Mercy. The Nature of my Work is Visionary or Imaginative; it is an Endeavour to Restore what the Ancients call’d the Golden Age.<sup>[2](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn002)</sup>

We shall come to this distinction between allegory and vision in a moment. There are two obvious inferences from the passage: first, that Blake’s poetry is all related to a central myth; and secondly, that the primary basis of this myth is the Bible, so that if we know how Blake read the Bible “in its infernal or diabolical sense”<sup>[3](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn003)</sup> we shall have little difficulty with his symbolism. The central principle of this diabolic interpretation is that the Bible is one poem, completely consistent in imagery and symbolism. Blake cared nothing about questions of authorship or historical accuracy: no one expects poetry, legend and saga to be reliable history or to come down to us ascribed to the right authors:

I cannot concieve the Divinity of the books in the Bible to consist either in who they were written by, or at what time, or in the historical evidence which may be all false in the eyes of one man & true in the eyes of another, but in the Sentiments & Examples, which, whether true or Parabolic, are Equally useful….<sup>[4](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn004)</sup>

Nor did he care, in spite of the somewhat un-Blakean sound of “Sentiments & Examples,” that Jehovah often urges a ferocious cruelty extremely repugnant to a civilized mind: if one gives up the attempt to extract a unified moral code out of the Bible this becomes a profoundly true vision of a false god. So Blake was ready to give a tolerant and sympathetic reading either to Swedenborg’s *True Christian Religion* or to Paine’s *Age of Reason.* His own ideas of the Bible were unaffected by Paine’s iconoclasm, but he considered that the latter might be useful in breaking up a good deal of stupid orthodoxy: in doing that Paine was working for Christianity, and against only the socially accepted perversion of it, or Antichrist.

The Bible is therefore the archetype of Western culture, and the Bible, with its derivatives, provides the basis for most of our major art: for Dante, Milton, Michelangelo, Raphael, Bach, the great cathedrals, and so on. The most complete form of art is a cyclic vision, which, like the Bible, sees the world between the two poles of fall and redemption. In Western art this is most clearly represented in the miracle-play sequences and encyclopedic symbolism of the Gothic cathedrals, which often cover the entire imaginative field from creation to the Last Judgment, and always fit integrally into some important aspect of it.

However, while “The Old & New Testaments are the Great Code of Art,”<sup>[5](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn005)</sup> to regard them as forming a peculiar and exclusive Word of God is a sectarian error, the same one that the Jews made and that proved such a disaster to them. All myths and rituals hint darkly and allegorically at the same visions that we find in the Bible, which is why they have such a strong resemblance to Christian myths and rituals, a resemblance explained by early Church Fathers as diabolic parodies or Bibles of Hell, as Blake calls his own prophecies. There are many great visions outside the range of the Bible, such as the Icelandic Eddas and the *Bhagavadgita*, almost equally faithful to the central form of the Word of God, and the Bible no less than Classical legends comes from older and more authentic sources. For when Blake speaks of “the Stolen and Perverted Writings of Homer & Ovid,” “set up by artifice against the Sublime of the Bible,”<sup>[6](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn006)</sup> he is not only implying the old Philonic doctrine that Plato and Ovid got their creation myths from Moses: he is also hinting at older Scriptures still from which the Bible itself has been derived:

The antiquities of every Nation under Heaven, is no less sacred than that of the Jews…. How other antiquities came to be neglected and disbelieved, while those of the Jews are collected and arranged, is an enquiry worthy both of the Antiquarian and the Divine.<sup>[7](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn007)</sup>

This feeling that the Bible does not exhaust the Word of God accounts for the phenomenon of what we may call contrapuntal symbolism, that is, the use of un-Christian mythology, usually Classical, to supplement and round out a Christian poem.

The cyclic vision in poetry is the true epic, whether based on the Bible, as in Dante and Milton, or outside its direct influence. The Classical epic represented by Homer and Virgil, which makes a rule of beginning in the middle, Blake thought comparatively formless<sup>[8](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn008)</sup>: much closer to his ideas are the more easy-going epics like Ovid’s *Metamorphoses*, which starts at the creation and works down; or, in fact, even the philosophical epics which also deal with cosmological themes, like *De Rerum Natura.* So are the Gnostic systems, which are intolerably dull and puzzling considered as abstract theologies, but might have more interest if read as epic poems. The *Légendes des Siècles* indicate that the drawing-up of huge cyclic schemes did not perish with Blake, though perhaps only in *Back to Methusaleh* has English literature a contemporary example of a complete cyclic form.

The meaning of history, like the meaning of art, is to be found in its relation to the same great archetype of human existence. The inner form of history is not the same thing as the progress of time: a linear chronicle is a wild fairy tale in which the fate of an empire hangs on the shape of a beauty’s nose, or the murder of a noble moron touches off a world war. And no poet concerned with human beings ever bothers to draw an individual as such: he is concerned with selecting the significant aspects of him. Significant in relation to what? In relation to the unity of his conception. But what makes that conception worth conceiving in the first place? Its relation, Blake would say, to the primary Word of God. We say that there is something universal in Quixote, Falstaff, Hamlet, Milton’s Satan. But “something universal” is rather vague: just what is universal about them? As soon as we attempt to answer this, we begin in spite of ourselves to elaborate our own versions of the archetypal myth. The true epic is a cyclic vision of life, and the true drama, including narrative and heroic poetry, is an episode of that cyclic vision, just as Greek tragedies were slices from the Homeric banquet. Great art, therefore, is more conventional than most people realize, and if Chaucer and Shakespeare are read in their “infernal or diabolic sense” we shall find in them the same imaginative conceptions that we find in the cyclic visions. As Blake points out, the witches in *Macbeth* are the same three goddesses of destiny we meet in the Norns and Fates.<sup>[9](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn009)</sup> Of Chaucer Blake says:

Chaucer’s characters live age after age. Every age is a Canterbury Pilgrimage; we all pass on, each sustaining one or other of these characters; nor can a child be born, who is not one of these characters of Chaucer…. Thus the reader will observe, that Chaucer makes every one of his characters perfect in his kind; every one is an Antique Statue; the image of a class, and not of an imperfect individual.<sup>[10](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn010)</sup>

**• 2 •**

IN the artist the difference between the time-bound ego and the imaginative state in which great things are done is even more sharply marked than it is in the ordinary man. The artist may be conceited, irritable, foolish or dishonest, but it makes no difference what he is: all that matters is his imagination. We speak of So-and-So “the Man,” meaning So-and-So when he is not being a poet; but it is only when So-and-So is using the imagination which is the “Real Man” and writing poetry that he is a man: the rest of the time he is on the ordinary Generation plane. That is why some of the greatest poets, Homer and Shakespeare for instance, hardly seem to have had a personal existence at all. They are inspired; that is, incarnations of the ability to write. As Blake goes on he becomes more and more impressed by the contrast between a man’s imagination, his real life as expressed in the total form of his creative acts, and his ordinary existence; and he devotes a good deal of the first part of *Jerusalem* to working out the conflict between them.

Hence it is a blunder to limit the meaning of art to what the artist may be presumed to have intended. The artist’s “intentions” are often on levels of consciousness quite unknown to himself. Some of these levels are subconscious and some superconscious: the latter may need the passing of centuries to clarify. The poet’s “Spectre” may be dull, wrong-headed or erratic: the plain meaning of his imagination the poet may perfectly well repudiate as a “man.” He is often a bad critic of his own work and is capable of saying inadequate and misleading things about it. Wordsworth will introduce his poems with comments like this:

Now the music of harmonious metrical language, the sense of difficulty overcome, and the blind association of pleasure which has been previously received from works of rhyme or metre of the same or similar construction, and indistinct perception perpetually renewed of language closely resembling that of real life, and yet, in the circumstance of metre, differing from it so widely—all these imperceptibly make up a complex feeling of delight, which is of the most important use in tempering the painful feeling always found intermingled with powerful descriptions of the deeper passions.

“I do not know who wrote these Prefaces,” said Blake: “they are very mischievous & direct contrary to Wordsworth’s own Practise.”<sup>[11](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn011)</sup> One would never guess, from all this twaddle about “blind association,” “indistinct perception,” lukewarm tempering of passion, and meter as a difficult way of distorting prose, that its author could be capable of the clear-cut visions of the Lucy poems. Wordsworth’s “Spectre” has obviously no right to open its mouth on the subject of Wordsworth’s poetry, of which it knows nothing whatever.

The poet’s meaning, then, is often quite different from what he may think he thought he meant, and in any case it is cumulative. Few great poets would be able to understand the reason for their fame in the following century. The inference is that all genuine poetry is something quite separate from the person who wrote it. A poem is like a child, an independently living being not fully born until the navel-string has been cut.

The lyric is no exception to this rule of objectivity. The poet can express himself in a lyric only by dramatizing the mental state or mood he is in, and the imaginative truth of the lyric refers to his state and not to himself. One may pass through state after state with bewildering rapidity: one may experience ten or twelve states of love or passion in as many seconds. But to create one must balance and harmonize one’s states, and what one creates takes its unity of tone and mood from that stabilization. The lyric, then, is normally a snapshot or single vision of an imaginative state by a poet who is in but not necessarily of it, and Blake’s engraved lyrics are grouped around the primary division of states into those of innocence and those of experience.

Of course a poet may give many useful suggestions about his own work, but we read the poem, not the poet, except by a figure of speech. Hence the primary activity of all communication with the poet is to establish the unity of his poem in our minds. We have quoted Blake as saying that every poem is necessarily a perfect unity. This unity has two aspects: a unity of words and a unity of images.

• 3 •

BLAKE says very little about diction in poetry, and our account of his ideas on this point will have to take the form of a conjectural reconstruction; but the poet who said, and apparently meant, that “Poetry admits not a Letter that is Insignificant” must have had strong feelings about it.

Those who accept the Baconian and Lockian principle that words are the spectral ghosts of real things existing outside the mind will be hampered by several misconceptions which will forever prevent them from understanding what poetry is and why it exists. It is characteristic of people with vague minds and wandering attentions to speak of literature as “just a lot of words,” meaning that words are inadequate and misleading substitutes for real things which the weakness and opacity of our minds compel us to adopt. But the assumption is false. If a tree fell in an uninhabited forest, would there be any sound? If sound means only waves set up in the air, yes; if it means waves set up in the air and striking a mind through its ear, no. But the latter meaning of sound is the only one that has any sense as well as sound. On the same principle, an object that has received a name is more real by virtue of it than an object without one. A thing’s name is its numen, its imaginative reality in the eternal world of the human mind. That is another reason why Jesus is called the Word of God. Reality is intelligibility, and a poet who has put things into words has lifted “things” from the barren chaos of nature into the created order of thought. The Preacher says wearily that of making many books there is no end: the Apostle John, in the full exuberance of the spirit released in him by Jesus, proclaims that the world is not nearly big enough to hold all that might be written about the Word.<sup>[12](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn012)</sup>

Now as all creative power is human and not natural, it follows that words are of the pattern of the human mind and not that of nature—though of course nature has no pattern either apart from the mind. Therefore the meaning of a word does not depend on its relation to an outside world. The Baconian mind strives to make every word reproduce one definite “thing” or one reflected “idea,” to the exclusion of all others: it is perpetually demanding definition in the sense of establishing a general law for each word that will meet every case. This cannot be done. A word’s meaning depends partly on its context and partly on its relation to the mind of its hearer: all general meanings are only approximate. To the poet the word is a storm-center of meanings, sounds and associations, radiating out indefinitely like the ripples of a pool. It is precisely because of this indefiniteness that he writes poems. The poem is a unity of words in which these radiations have become the links of imaginative cohesion. In a poem the sounds and rhythms of words are revealed more clearly than in ordinary speech, and similarly their meanings have an intensity in poetry that a dictionary can give no hint of.

This respect for the imaginative integrity of poetry is the reason for Blake’s distrust of set patterns of meter and rhyme. Only lyrics, and not many of them, can be in a strict stanzaic form: longer works must have much greater fluency if the sound, sense and subject are to make a complete correspondence at all times. Blake says of his *Jerusalem:*

When this Verse was first dictated to me, I consider’d a Monotonous Cadence, like that used by Milton & Shakespeare & all writers of English Blank Verse, derived from the modern bondage of Rhyming, to be a necessary and indispensible part of Verse. But I soon found that in the mouth of a true Orator such monotony was not only awkward, but as much a bondage as rhyme itself. I therefore have produced a variety in every line, both of cadences & number of syllables. Every word and every letter is studied and put into its fit place; the terrific numbers are reserved for the terrific parts, the mild & gentle for the mild & gentle parts, and the prosaic for inferior parts; all are necessary to each other.<sup>[13](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn013)</sup>

It is interesting that Blake cheerfully admits what to Poe was a fatal objection to the long poem, that it occasionally must lapse into the prosaic.

• 4 •

THE question of the unity of imagery in poetry brings us to the question of the right and wrong kinds of allegory referred to in the opening chapter. A poem’s “meaning” is its existence: as a modern poet has said, poetry should not mean but be. Our understanding of it must be, like all understanding, “not by deduction, but Immediate by Perception or Sense at once.” In order to attain this unified vision, a good deal of explanation may be necessary. Poets are likely to be, as Gabriel Harvey says, curious universal scholars, dealing with complex material in a very erudite way. But when this explanation ceases to be a means to the end of unifying the poem in our minds, and comes to be thought of as the real form of the poem, everything goes wrong, and all the poem’s infinite variety is staled at once.

Hence what is usually called allegory, that is, art the meaning of which points away from itself toward something else which is not art, is a profane abomination. It would be far better if the morals of Aesop’s Fables, the signposts pointing from art to ethics, were snipped off, because all the morality worth having is already in the story, heightened by the fact that we are not bound down to a single conclusion. The artist must have confidence that the work of art will carry its own “message” without putting in an additional one for the Spectres. The allegory which is merely a set of moral doctrines or historical facts, ornamented to make them easier for simple minds, is not at all the kind of thing that the great allegorical writers were trying to produce. If it were, Dickens’ remark that the chief function of allegory seems to be to make one’s head ache would require no qualification. In this sense of the word, Bunyan is not allegorical but Samuel Smiles is; Dante is not but medieval homilies at their dullest are. Here is Blake’s own statement on this point:

Fable or Allegory are a totally distinct & inferior kind of Poetry. Vision or Imagination is a Representation of what Eternally Exists, Really & Unchangeably. Fable or Allegory is Form’d by the daughters of Memory…. Fable is allegory, but what Critics call The Fable, is Vision itself. The Hebrew Bible & the Gospel of Jesus are not Allegory, but Eternal Vision or Imagination of All that Exists. Note here that Fable or Allegory is seldom without some Vision. Pilgrim’s Progress is full of it, the Greek Poets the same; but Allegory & Vision ought to be known as Two Distinct Things….<sup>[14](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn014)</sup>

“Allegory” in the above sense is closely related to the kind of symbolism which is founded on the simile. To say that a hero is *like* a lion is a reference to something else on the same imaginative plane. Subject and object, as in Lockian philosophy, are considered to be only accidentally related. Even an epic simile enriches the symbolism only at the price of digressing from the narrative. The artist, contemplating the hero, searches in his memory for something that reminds him of the hero’s courage, and drags out a lion. But here we no longer have two real things: we have a correspondence of abstractions. The hero’s courage, not the hero himself, is what the lion symbolizes. And a lion which symbolizes an abstract quality is not a real but a heraldic lion. Some lions are cowardly; some are old and sick; some are cubs; some are female. And it is no use to say that a mature courageous male healthy lion is an “ideal” one: we should need an old and sick lion for an old and sick hero. Whenever we take our eye off the image we slip into abstractions, into regarding qualities, moral or intellectual, as more real than living things. So Blake opposes to “Similitude” the “Identity,” the latter being the metaphor which unites the theme and the illustration of it. Let us quote again a passage we have given before and put it beside a new one:

Harmony and Proportion are Qualities & not Things. The Harmony & Proportion of a Horse are not the same with those of a Bull. Every Thing has its own Harmony & Proportion, Two Inferior Qualities in it. For its Reality is its imaginative Form.

Aristotle says Characters are either Good or Bad; now Goodness or Badness has nothing to do with Character: an Apple tree, a Pear tree, a Horse, a Lion are Characters, but a Good Apple tree or a Bad is an Apple tree still; a Horse is not more a Lion for being a Bad Horse: that is its Character: its Goodness or Badness is another consideration.<sup>[15](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn015)</sup>

All symbolism that deals with qualities has too many bad qualities of its own to be of any use to art. Hence we must not expect to find in Blake any kind of personification, or attempt to give life to an abstraction. When we read in *The Four Zoas* that Los attempts to embrace Enitharmon but that she is jealous and goes over to the embraces of Urizen, it is neither very helpful nor very interesting to translate that as: “Time or Prophecy attempts to overcome Space but Space falls under the domination of Reason.” The continuous translation of poetic images into a series of moral and philosophical concepts is what usually passes for the explanation of an allegory. Now a reconstruction of a poem in abstract nouns is not necessarily a false interpretation of part of its meaning. But it is a translation, which means that it assumes the reader’s ignorance of the original language.

• 5 •

ONCE again we see that art is neither inferior nor equal to morality and truth, but the synthesis of civilized life in which alone their general laws have any real meaning. Art is neither good nor bad, but a clairvoyant vision of the nature of both, and any attempt to align it with morality, otherwise called bowdlerizing, is intolerably vulgar. “Is not every Vice possible to Man,” asked Blake, “described in the Bible openly?”<sup>[16](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn016)</sup> Art is neither true nor false, but a clairvoyant vision of the nature of both, and any attempt to estimate its merits by the accuracy with which it reproduces the data of history or science is foolish. A subtler problem, once again, is presented by religion, which claims to be the synthesis of morality and truth we have said that art is, and hence to be superior to it.

Let us go back to the eleventh plate of *The Marriage of Heaven and Hell*, already mentioned:

The ancient Poets animated all sensible objects with Gods or Geniuses, calling them by the names and adorning them with the properties of woods, rivers, mountains, lakes, cities, nations, and whatever their enlarged & numerous senses could percieve….

Till a system was formed, which some took advantage of, & enslav’d the vulgar by attempting to realize or abstract the mental deities from their objects: thus began Priesthood;

Choosing forms of worship from poetic tales.

And at length they pronounc’d that the Gods had order’d such things.

Thus men forgot that All deities reside in the human breast.

Now just as the poet is brought up to speak and write one particular language, so he is brought up in the traditions of one particular religion. And his function as a poet is to concentrate on the myths of that religion, and to recreate the original imaginative life of those myths by transforming them into unique works of art. The essential truth of a religion can be presented only in its essential form, which is that of imaginative vision. “Every thing possible to be believ’d is an image of truth”; in which case everything possible to be believed by the ordinary man is actually to be seen by the visionary. The human imagination knows that man fell: the Biblical story of Adam and Eve is a vision of that fact which has frozen into a myth. Milton’s reason told him that that story was “true”; his imagination told him that it was an image of truth, and stimulated him to recreate it in that form.

The artist *qua* artist neither doubts nor believes his religion: he sees what it means, and he knows how to illustrate it. His religion performs two great services for him. It provides him with a generally understood body of symbols, and it puts into his hands the visionary masterpieces on which it is founded: the Bible particularly, in the case of Christian poets. Many of these latter have petrified into sacred Scriptures supposed now to impart exclusive formulas of salvation rather than vision. It is the business of a poet, however, to see them as poems, and base his own poetry on them as such.

To do this he must bring out more sharply and accurately what the human mind was trying to do when it first created the beings we now call gods. Jupiter is a sky-god: he is a product of the imaginative tendency to see the sky as an old man, as Blake sees the thistle, and not as an abstraction called Heaven. Originally he was conceived as a tyrannical old bully because he represented the imaginative feeling of a hostile mystery in the sky-world. Venus became a beautiful harlot because the imagination sees “nature” as a woman and finds her lovely but treacherous. As the original “organized men,” or “Giant forms,”<sup>[17](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn017)</sup> dwindle into gods, the clarity of their relationship to the archetypal myth becomes blurred, and irrelevant stories and attributes cluster around them. They become increasingly vague and general until, in their final stages, they are mere personifications; and by the time that Phoebus and Philomela have become highbrow synonyms for the sun and the nightingale, they have disappeared.

It is only in works of art that these hazy divinities can be provided with a distinctive context and given a particular meaning. “Venus” means nothing: an Aphrodite by Phidias, the Venus of Shakespeare’s *Venus and Adonis*, the Venus of Lucretius’ *De Rerum Natura*, do mean something, though very different things. Once again we come back to the point that religion is raw imaginative material clarified by art.

This is why we meet so many new names in Blake and find ourselves reading about Vala and Urizen instead of Venus and Zeus. It may be thought that the more familiar names would make the Prophecies easier, but actually it would make them more difficult. To Venus and Zeus we bring memories and associations rather than a concentrated response, and are thus continually impelled to search outside the poem being read for its meaning. And as no two poets can possibly mean the same thing by “Venus,” we should have to go through a long process of discarding misleading associations which the use of a new name prevents at once. Those who think that a greater writer would be less exacting are under an illusion. Some poets, including Homer, Chaucer and Shakespeare,  present a smooth readable surface for the lazy reader to slide over: others, including Dante, Spenser and Blake, make it impossible for any reader to overlook the fact that they contain deeper meanings. The wails of protest which the latter group arouses show only that the real profundity of the former group has not been touched. Blake has tried to show us, in his essay on Chaucer, how inadequate it is to bring preconceived notions of medieval monks and friars and merry widows to the *General Prologue.* It follows, of course, that the familiar names we do find in Blake, such as Reuben, Satan and Merlin, do not depend for their meaning on one’s memory of Genesis, Milton or Malory.

The difference between Christianity and other religions is not the difference between truth and falsehood, for the gods of the Christian pantheon are, to the imaginative eye, the same white-whiskered tyrant, the same tortured dying god, the same remote and ineffable Queen of Heaven, that we find in all religions. Even the Bible must be shaken upside-down before it will yield all its secrets. The priests have censored and clipped and mangled: they give us a celibate Jesus born of a virgin without the slightest “stain” of sexual contact, which is blasphemous nonsense; and they tried to turn the fact that Christ came “to abolish the Jewish Imposture”<sup>[18](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn018)</sup> into an excuse for starting a new Christian imposture. The Bible is in a very special category compared with other works of art, but it too yields precedence to the imagination. (There is of course no place in Blake’s thought for a “conflict” of the Bible with science: to read Genesis for biology is far sillier than to read *Macbeth* for Scottish history.) The central form of Christianity is its vision of the humanity of God and the divinity of risen Man, and this, in varying ways, is what all great Christian artists have attempted to recreate. Insofar as they regard the divinity worshiped by Christians as other than human, they produce cloudy and inaccurate visions. Milton’s Satan comes off more clearly than his God because he has attempted to equate the latter with abstract goodness and perfection. There is nothing for such a God to do except recite the creed and rationalize the miserable agony of fallen man into a defense of his own virtue. Satan is human and real, a mixture of good and evil, imagination and Selfhood, and therefore has a place in a work of art.

Poetry cannot be made, either of morality and personifications, or of mythology and gods, as long as the artist considers himself to be an illustrator or a transcriber. Spenser (whom Blake does not mention but whom he had certainly read) had a tendency to personification and Milton to theology, and it is instructive to see in their work how their interest in them is always in inverse proportion to the quality of the writing. Shakespeare and Chaucer follow a sounder poetic policy. They avert their eyes from both gods and abstract nouns, and concentrate on living men and real things, on the particular rather than the general. Malbecco in Spenser “Forgot he was a man, and *Gealosie* is hight,”<sup>[19](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn019)</sup> but the characters of Shakespeare never dwindle into abstractions.

In the minds of Chaucer and Shakespeare was the universal Word of God, the archetypal vision of “All that Exists,”<sup>[20](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn020)</sup> which they had by virtue of their own genius, however much their reading may have contributed to it. They may not have been fully conscious that they possessed that vision, but that is why Othello and the Wife of Bath are not individuals but “Giant forms,” exactly as Hercules and Juno originally were. They are, as we say, of universal significance, and that means precisely of the significance of the universe, the whole of life seen in the primary outlines of the human and divine mind—for Shakespeare and Chaucer, rightly understood, reveal these primary outlines just as the Bible does. If allegory means this universal significance in the artist’s creation of particular things, then all art worth looking at or listening to, including music, is allegorical.

The ultimate significance of a work of art is simply a dimension added to its literal meaning, which can no more be separated from it than the depth of a pool of water can be separated from its surface. Dante says that the profoundest understanding of poetry, which he calls anagogy, “even in the literal sense, by the very things it signifies, signifies again some portion of the supernal things of eternal glory.”<sup>[21](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn021)</sup> All moral, historical, political, biographical and other “interpretations” should lead us directly from the superficial to the complete apprehension of the same thing, the single image of reality which the work of art is. Dante’s own *Commedia* is not affected by the fact that the geology of its hell, the geography of its purgatory, the astronomy of its paradise, are all impossible, and the theology of the whole poem rejected in part or *in toto* by many readers. Any fool knows that, but what he may not know is that the permanent form of the poem, which survives all the vacillations inseparable from “belief,” is allegory addressed to the intellectual powers. The same is true of all other works of art whatever.

• 6 •

THIS universal perception of the particular applies to natural objects as well as human forms. Ordinarily, our perception of the world is haphazard; it is often unrelated to our simultaneous mental processes, and hence when we use a real thing to “symbolize” a state of mind it seems to us only a fancied or arbitrary resemblance. At most, a natural object may symbolize a mental event because it “corresponds” to something in the mind. Here we still have Lockian dualism and its simile. But when we speak of the desire of the Selfhood or ego to restrict activity in others, it is rather inadequate to say that a prison is a “symbol” of the Selfhood. Prisons exist because Selfhoods do: they are the real things the Selfhood produces, and symbols of it only in that sense. To say that in Blake the sea is a symbol of chaos is incorrect if it assumes that “chaos” has any existence except in a number of real things which includes the sea. The sea is the image of chaos. “Image” and “form” being the same word in Blake, the sea is the form of chaos. As even chaos is only an abstract idea unless it is a perceived form, the sea is the reality of chaos.

And when we realize that everything exists in the form it does because man is fallen God, it becomes evident that all things are the realities of fall and regeneration. Art could not possess its infinite variety if archetypal visions could be represented only by a group of special symbols. In his poem called “Auguries of Innocence” Blake says:

He who the Ox to wrath has mov’d

Shall never be by Woman lov’d.

This is obviously not true of the state of experience: the title of the poem shows that Blake is talking about a Paradise or Beulah into which men who abuse oxen cannot enter. This “augury of innocence” is of the same order of thought as Jesus’: “Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.” This is simple enough, but another couplet from the same poem is more complicated:

The Bat that flits at close of Eve

Has left the Brain that won’t Believe.

The bat is black and prefers darkness to light. For this reason a superstitious man would see it as something ominous, and a Lockian poet would see it as a symbol of doubt. But to Blake it is neither of these things. Blake means precisely what he says. In human society everything from the Sistine ceiling to thumbscrews owes its form to man’s mind and character in one of its various aspects. Similarly the character of everything in nature expresses an aspect of the human mind. We say that a snowflake has a symmetrical design, not because the snowflake has consciously produced it, but because we can see the design. We see that the snow-flake has achieved something of which we alone can see the form, and the form of the snowflake is therefore a human form. It is the function of art to illuminate the human form of nature, to present the ferocity of the weasel, the docility of the sheep, the drooping delicacy of the willow, the grim barrenness of the precipice, so that we can see the character of the weasel, the sheep, the willow and the precipice. This vision of character, or total form, is something of course much more inclusive than the words given, which express only aspects of that character, can suggest.

“The man was like a lion” is a Lockian simile, an attempt to express a human character in natural terms. “The man was a lion” is a much more dramatic and effective figure, and more suggestive of their real relationship; but still it is essentially a simile with the word “like” omitted. But if we say “the lion is like a man” we are getting somewhere, and beginning to achieve the concentrated focus of the artist’s vision on the lion which reveals his form to the human eye. As we proceed in our vision, everything positive and real about the lion becomes an aspect of our perception of him, and we can take the next step and say that the lion is entirely a human form, a human creature. All art interprets nature in human terms in this way, so vividly that we hardly dare admit what art tells us about the relation between tears and tempests, joy and sunshine, love and the moon, death and winter, resurrection and spring. The real bat, therefore, is that aspect of the human imagination which prefers darkness to light; and this bat is the exact opposite of the bat which is a symbol of doubt. The famous “Ghost of the Flea” similarly shows the human form of that insect.

The painted lion is not alive; the natural lion has not been emancipated into a human order. The painter’s task is not a hopelessly quixotic attempt to capture his model’s life, but to show its relationship to a universal human order, a Paradise in which lions owe their generation as well as their form to human minds. The most concentrated vision of the lion sees this archetypal human creature in the ferocious wildcat of nature, as Blake’s poem on the tiger does. In some cases, including the flea, and perhaps the bat, this archetypal form was a product of the Fall, and would either disappear from Paradise or take on unrecognizable attributes, as in fact the Bible tells us is true of serpents.

Those who do not love living things do not love God or Man, as the Ancient Mariner found to his cost. But because some Greek poet loved the nightingale, he created from her the human figure of Philomela, and by doing so passed from love into vision, from a sensitive reaction to nature into the intelligent form of civilized human life, or Paradise. The story of Philomela is not a fantasy suggested by the nightingale, but a vision of the fall of the original human nightingale into its present natural shape. Blake says:

Think of a white cloud as being holy, you cannot love it; but think of a holy man within the cloud, love springs up in your thoughts, for to think of holiness distinct from man is impossible to the affections.<sup>[22](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn022)</sup>

But if the poet can see the world in a grain of sand, it is because he already has that archetypal vision of “All that Exists,” of which everything he sees is a form or image. All Blake’s poetry is related to his particular view of this vision, that “Central Form composed of all other Forms”<sup>[23](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn023)</sup> which he concedes to Reynolds. Within the huge framework of this central form, certain states of the human mind that created it inevitably appear and take on human lineaments, just as a pantheon crystallizes from a religious vision. Blake’s characters are the “Giant forms” that religions worship as gods and artists visualize as “organized men.”

Our next task is to outline Blake’s central myth. Its boundaries, once more, are creation, fall, redemption and apocalypse, and it embraces the four imaginative levels of existence, Eden, Beulah, Generation and Ulro. It revolves around the four antitheses that we have been tracing in the first four chapters, of imagination and memory in thought, innocence and experience in religion, liberty and tyranny in society, outline and imitation in art. These four antitheses are all aspects of one, the antithesis of life and death, and Blake assumes that we have this unity in our heads.

**• 7 •**

WE have dealt with Blake’s point that in a perfectly imaginative state all individuals are integral units of a race, species or class, related to it as tissues and cells are to a body. This larger unit is not an abstraction or aggregate, but a larger human body or human being: the instructive ambiguity of these phrases has been noted. Hence whether we see the larger unit as one man or as a multitude of individuals is a matter of perspective. We have referred to Milton’s vision of the English nation as one huge Christian personage. The most inclusive vision possible, then, is to see the universe as One Man, who to a Christian is Jesus. On nearer view Jesus is seen as a “Council of God”<sup>[24](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn024)</sup> or group of “Eternals” or Patriarchs, seen by ancient prophets as dwelling in a Golden Age of peace and happiness. On still nearer view these patriarchs, the memory of whom survives in the Bible under the accounts of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, resolve themselves into vast numbers of individual men.

One of these Eternals, named Albion, has fallen. Albion includes, presumably, all the humanity that we know in the world of time and space, though visualized as a single Titan or giant. The history of the world from its creation, which was part of his fall, to the Last Judgment is his sleep. The yet unfallen part of God made seven attempts to awaken him, and in the seventh Jesus himself descended into the world of Generation and began his final redemption.

This myth of a primeval giant whose fall was the creation of the present universe is not in the Bible itself, but has been preserved by the Cabbala in its conception of Adam Kadmon, the universal man who contained within his limbs all heaven and earth, to whom Blake refers.<sup>[25](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn025)</sup> A somewhat more accessible form of the same myth is in the Prose Edda, a cyclic work systematizing the fragmentary apocalyptic poems of the Elder Edda, which to Blake contained traditions as antique and authentic as those of the Old Testament itself.<sup>[26](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn026)</sup> In the sleep of the giant Ymir, the Edda tells us, the earth was made of his flesh, the mountains of his bones, the heavens from his skull, the sea from his blood, the clouds from his brains—this last has a particularly Blakean touch.

The Greeks have also kept a dim memory of a Golden Age before the Fall in their legend of a lost island of Atlantis and of a giant who contained the world in the figure of Atlas, the Titan who bears the world on his back, a perfect image of the fallen Albion with nature outside him and pressing upon him, and of the etymology of that curious word “understanding.” Atlantis, according to Plato’s *Critias*, was settled by the god Poseidon (possibly Blake’s “Ariston”), whose eldest son was Atlas: this corresponds to the English tradition, preserved in Spenser, that Albion, the eponymous ancestor of England, was the son of Neptune:

The giant Albion, was Patriarch of the Atlantic; he is the Atlas of the Greeks, one of those the Greeks called Titans.<sup>[27](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn027)</sup>

The fall of Albion included a deluge in which the center of Atlantis was overwhelmed and only the fragments of the British Isles were left. The settlement of America by the English and revolt of America against the dead hand of English tyranny is therefore the dawn of a new age in which Atlantis begins to appear above the waves. In the meantime England still exists in the spiritual world as Atlantis, and Blake’s engraved poems are on its mountains.<sup>[28](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn028)</sup>

There are several accounts of the Fall in Blake which we shall summarize later, but the invariable characteristic of them is Albion’s relapse from active creative energy to passivity. This passivity takes the form of wonder or awe at the world he has created, which in eternity he sees as a woman. The Fall thus begins in Beulah, the divine garden identified with Eden in Genesis. Once he takes the fatal step of thinking the object-world independent of him, Albion sinks into a sleep symbolizing the passivity of his mind, and his creation separates and becomes the “female will” or Mother Nature, the remote and inaccessible universe of tantalizing mystery we now see. Love, or the transformation of the objective into the beloved, and art, or the transformation of the objective into the created, are the two activities pursued on this earth to repair the damage of the Fall, and they raise our state to Beulah and Eden respectively.

On earth the cult of worshiping the independent object or female will takes two chief forms. One is the superstitious reverence for a Mother God, the primitive fear of the sibyl or prophetess whom the Teutons called Vala. This is a symbolic form of nature-worship, and Blake gives the name Vala to nature in his symbolism. The other form is the worship not so much of vegetative nature as of the Queen of Heaven, the remote, mysterious beauty of the starry heavens. This produces on earth the blind devotion to a mistress who is expected to elude and tantalize the lover, the basis of the Troubadour code. The Queen of Heaven’s name in Blake is Enitharmon.<sup>[29](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn029)</sup>

The fall of Albion, the company of nations living in the Golden Age, was followed at once by the appearance of the “female will.” The story of Adam and Eve in the Bible, which represents a fairly late stage in the Fall, shows sin and death entering the world through a woman: the fact that Adam fell through adoration of Eve is however more clearly brought out in *Paradise Lost.* Of older provenance is the reference in Genesis to the sons of God intermarrying with the daughters of men, more fully elaborated in the Book of Enoch.<sup>[30](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn030)</sup> The story of Samson and Delilah is also, as Milton divined, another ancient myth dealing with a giant who fell through yielding to the female will; and so is the story of the murder of Sisera by Jael. The stories of Pandora and of the shutting-up of the prophet Merlin in a box by a woman are connected with the same theme, though referred to by Blake very obliquely, if at all. More important than any of these in Blake’s symbolism are those five curious “daughters of Zelopehad” who wander in and out of the Hexateuch looking for a separate female inheritance.<sup>[31](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn031)</sup> One of them is named Tirzah, also the name of an Israelite capital of the Ten Tribes, and therefore a symbol of opposition to Jerusalem, the City of God. This Tirzah is associated with a beautiful woman in the Song of Songs. The five daughters represent the five senses and imply the passive dependence on sense experience which is symbolized in our being born from a mother. This is the meaning of the little poem “To Tirzah” which ends the *Songs of Experience.*

The word “emanation” in Blake means the object-world; creature in Eden, female in Beulah, object or nature in Generation, abstraction in Ulro. “Spectre” means the subjective counterpart to this in the two fallen states. Now the spiritual world is to Blake always something civilized, a city or a palace (in the highest imaginative state there would be no difference between a city and a palace, but a house of many mansions) surrounded by the garden or cultivated nature of the Biblical Paradise. Men lose the “opaque” qualities of their minds in higher imaginative states: therefore the spiritual world is a completely integrated body of imaginative men. The Christian Church is the nearest symbol of this on earth; but all visible churches are really part of a political body. This political body is symbolized in the Bible by Jerusalem, which in the Apocalypse becomes the New Jerusalem, the spiritualized church of the imaginative, the liberty of the sons of God united in brotherhood. Jerusalem is therefore the emanation of the awakened Albion. The Jesus who redeemed Albion suffered in the old Jerusalem, and when Albion awakes he will be with Jesus in the new one. The union of Albion and Jerusalem suggests a parallelism between English and Hebrew history which runs all through Blake’s symbolism, and which underlies the famous hymn beginning “And did those feet in ancient time.” This is natural, for the Last Judgment is seen by a poet “according to the situation he holds” and Blake’s situation was that of an English Christian.

The seven attempts made by God to awaken Albion divide history into seven great periods, each with a dominating religion. These Blake identifies with the “Seven Eyes of God” mentioned in Zechariah, and he gives these “Eyes” the names of Lucifer, Moloch, the Elohim, Shaddai, Pachad, Jehovah and Jesus.<sup>[32](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn032)</sup> The “eighth eye” he occasionally speaks of is the apocalypse or awakening of Albion himself.

The Fall was not a single event, but required many generations, and covered the first three “Eyes” of God, described by Hesiod and Ovid as the silver, bronze and iron ages which followed the golden one. The silver age or Lucifer period was a time in which the universe was tearing apart in chaotic disorder, and gigantic energies, sprung from the body of Albion, were fighting for imaginative control of it. Myths of the war of Titans on Zeus in the Classics, and of the Jötuns on Odin in the Eddas, preserve accounts of a war of giants and gods. The giants are rightfully defeated, according to most of our Scriptures, because even the fallen order of nature which the gods established is preferable to chaos. But the feeling that Odin and Zeus are really usurpers can still be traced. Gradually, as the universe took its present form, the weakening human imagination was slowly pushed down and contracted into its present helpless state. Yet gigantic energies still remain in men, imprisoned, but struggling to be free. The revolt of Prometheus nearly destroyed Olympus; and in the Eddas it is prophesied that some day the chained Loki will burst free and begin the destruction of the world.<sup>[33](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn033)</sup> This imprisoned Titanic power in man, which spasmodically causes revolutions, Blake calls Orc. Orc is regarded as an evil being by conventional morality, but in Blake the coming of Jesus is one of his reappearances.

The victory of the sky-god over the Titans means that the universe slowly became more orderly and predictable, and that men, weaker than the Titans but still gigantic, turned to internecine war as history enters the “Moloch” brazen period. The new thundergod of moral law and tyrannical power, whom Blake calls Urizen, was a projection of the death-impulse, and these giants, at the nadir of the Fall, worshiped him in a cult of death consisting largely of human sacrifices. Since then, the belief that somehow it is right to kill men has been the underlying cause of all wars.

This is the period of Druidism, when giants erected huge sacrificial temples like Stonehenge and indulged in hideously murderous orgies. The burning of great numbers of victims in wicker cages went on for centuries and is referred to by Caesar and other Classical writers: Blake, for some reason, speaks of the “Wicker Man of Scandinavia,” where such practices, according to his authority, were unknown.<sup>[34](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn034)</sup> Early explorers found the same custom in Mexico, indicating the world-wide spread of the Druid culture.<sup>[35](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn035)</sup> The main characteristics of Druidism, to be treated in more detail later, were megaliths or temples for human sacrifice, sun worship, serpent worship and tree worship—in Britain, of the oak.

During the Druid period the world took its present form, which means, as to be is to be perceived, that men’s bodies were gradually shrinking down to the point at which they now perceive it. When the present body of man was achieved, the universe necessarily appeared to that body in its present shape. Its present shape is a stabilizing of the object-world, made permanent on a basis of “mathematic form” or mechanical order. Therefore the creation of the present body of man must have been part of this stabilization.  Such a creation must have been an “act of Mercy” and the work of the yet unfallen God, for men by themselves in their fallen state have sunk below the instinct of self-preservation.

This process is described in the Biblical story of Adam and Eve, the Ask and Embla of the Eddas. Adam in Blake is the physical man, the soul in the form of the bodies we now see. He is called the “Limit of Contraction”: that is, he has fallen as far as man can fall without losing his imagination altogether and the ability to recreate himself along with it. Along with his creation went the completion of the present universe, which Blake calls the “Mundane Shell,” and, probably, the settling of animals and plants into their present natural order of spawning and preying, the aggregate of which Blake calls the “Polypus,” a huge wriggling mass of life. This all took place in the third “Eye” of the Elohim. This word is plural in form, and Blake follows tradition in regarding the Elohim as a trinity. But on the principles of Blake’s symbolism the trinity would become a collective singular at a little distance, and is so portrayed in the great picture of “The Elohim Creating Adam.”<sup>[36](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn036)</sup> From Adam’s time until the Last Judgment, a period for which Blake adopts the conventional figure of six thousand years, the remaining four eras or Eyes of God are divided into twenty-eight phases or “Churches,” corresponding to the twenty-eight cities of Albion mentioned by Geoffrey of Monmouth.<sup>[37](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn037)</sup> The world of time and space is a “sublunary” world of cyclic change, and is associated with the twenty-eight-day lunar cycle.

The first twenty of these Churches cover the remainder of the Druid period and the fourth and fifth eyes of God, Shaddai and Pachad. They are known to us only from the genealogical lists of the Bible. Seth, Enoch, Methusaleh, Noah, Shem and the other patriarchs down to Abraham, who are said to have lived for centuries, are not individual men but civilizations or historical cycles which grew up in Africa and Asia.

We know the African culture only from its final decadence in Egypt, with its hieratic ritual, oppressive priestly code, tyrannical monarchy and the “mathematic form” of its pyramids. Apparently the Exodus in the Bible is a reminiscence of the founding of new Druid kingdoms in Asia at the beginning of the Shaddai period. The Noachic deluge, which may be partly a reminiscence of the overwhelming of Atlantis, is also connected with the same event, and symbolically it completes the establishing of the “Limit of Contraction” in Adam. When man falls, nature falls too; and when man is locked into an enfeebled body, born in helpless dependence on a precreated object, and a prey to selfishness, fear and all other symptoms of weakness, nature becomes a prey to sudden accidents and senseless cataclysms. When Blake speaks of the earthquake at Lisbon, which so exercised the theologians of design, as “the Natural result of Sin,”<sup>[38](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn038)</sup> he means that earthquakes are a natural result of living in a fallen world:

The Bible says that God formed Nature perfect, but that Man perverted the order of Nature, since which time the Elements are fill’d with the Prince of Evil, who has the power of the air.<sup>[39](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn039)</sup>

However that may be, the great “Druid” civilizations of Asia, particularly Mesopotamia, produced magnificent works of art and literature in their prime: again, history records only their late degenerate period. Of the literature, only the Old Testament survives. We can get some idea of what their art was like from the Greeks, however, for the Greek Muses were daughters of Memory, which means that Classical culture is a parasitic growth on the earlier Asiatic ones, and Classical mythology contains many echoes, usually misunderstood by its compilers, of earlier and more authentic visions:

No man can believe that either Homer’s Mythology, or Ovid’s, were the production of Greece or of Latium; neither will any one believe, that the Greek statues, as they are called, were the invention of Greek Artists; perhaps the Torso is the only original work remaining; all the rest are evidently copies, though fine ones, from greater works of the Asiatic Patriarchs.<sup>[40](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn040)</sup>

At any rate, one should give Blake credit for realizing that the marble mediocrities dug up in that age of Winckelmann were copies of something. The Trojan war symbolizes the taking-over of Asiatic culture by the Greeks. The beings of the earlier myths, which appeared on the walls of Solomon’s Temple and were called Cherubim, were recognized as imaginative creations: the gods of the Greeks, derived from them, were conceived as independent of man:

Visions of these eternal principles or characters of human life appear to poets, in all ages; the Grecian gods were the ancient Cherubim of Phoenicia; but the Greeks, and since them the Moderns, have neglected to subdue the gods of Priam. These gods are visions of the eternal attributes, or divine names, which, when erected into gods, become destructive to humanity. They ought to be the servants, and not the masters of man, or of society. They ought to be made to sacrifice to Man, and not man compelled to sacrifice to them; for when separated from man or humanity, who is Jesus the Saviour, the vine of eternity, they are thieves and rebels, they are destroyers.<sup>[41](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn041)</sup>

Troy in Blake therefore stands for the abstraction of the “fairies of Albion” into “Gods of the heathen.” Hence the conquest of England by the Trojan Brutus symbolizes the final collapse of the great Druidic civilizations of antiquity, paralleling the Platonic account of the defeat of Atlantis by Athens. Geoffrey of Monmouth’s history, the source of the Brutus story, is to Blake a repository of ancient prophetic poems which, like much of the Old Testament, has survived only in the form of a chronicle of kings and queens:

Names anciently remember’d, but now contemn’d as fictions

Although in every bosom they controll our Vegetative powers.<sup>[42](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn042)</sup>

The Trojan war is also, because based on the love of a whore, the source of all the chivalric female-will worship of the Middle Ages. After it, imaginative animism almost drops out of culture and a belief in abstract gods reigns supreme over most of the earth, the former surviving among the Druids only as esoteric traditions preserved by the caste of bards.

Before this had happened, however, the Jehovah cycle of history had begun with the founding of a new Hebrew culture, presented in the Bible as the escape of a patriarch (really a “Church”) called Abraham, from Chaldea. The essential feature of this was the giving-up of human sacrifice in favor of animal sacrifice, symbolized in the story of the substitution of a ram for Isaac as a victim:

Adam was a Druid, and Noah; also Abraham was called to succeed the Druidical age, which began to turn allegoric and mental signification into corporeal command, whereby human sacrifice would have depopulated the earth.<sup>[43](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn043)</sup>

So far, so good; but truth precipitates error, and in every culture great imaginative work is done in the face of a consolidating tyranny. The growth of the Classical civilization was only part of this negative response to Abraham: the rest came in the establishment of a moral law and a ceremonial worship of a thunderous tyrant by Moses, the twenty-second “Church,” completed by the integration of this into a political tyranny by David and Solomon, who represent the twenty-third.

According to Swedenborg, the Hexateuch is a compilation of earlier and later documents. The first eleven chapters of Genesis, down to Abraham, are ancient and belong to an original *Ur-Bibel;* but most of the Exodus account is drawn from earlier books, now lost. These consisted of a history and a prophecy, referred to in Numbers xxi, 14 and 27; also the “Book of Jasher.”<sup>[44](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn044)</sup> The Exodus account as we have it is therefore somewhat confused, and an ancient prophetic poem has been rewritten from a priestly point of view. The Passover incident represents, like the Isaac story, the decline of human sacrifice, and the Exodus itself seems to go back to the emergence of an Asiatic civilization which probably took place nearer the time of Adam. But the real basis of the Exodus story was a poem in which Egypt symbolized Ulro and the Promised Land Eden. In that poem the imaginative energy which achieved the entry into Eden, the pillar of fire, was called Joshua, which means Jesus. (Blake usually calls it Orc, who is also Jesus, but in one poem Fuzon: he rejects the identification of Jesus and Joshua suggested in Milton’s line, “And Joshua, whom the Gentiles Jesus call.”<sup>[45](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn045)</sup>) The pillar of cloud, the power of tyranny which kept the Hebrews wandering in a wilderness trying to follow their elusive Sinaitic ghost (Urizen) was Egypt itself, which Moses represented. What is now given us as a ferocious butchery of Canaanite tribes was in the original the annihilation of the bogies of the Selfhood. The Biblical account makes little sense as history: at best it is historical reminiscence seen poetically, like the Trojan war in the *Iliad.* Hence when the prophets and psalmists speak of the deliverance of their people from Egypt, they are concerned only with the “anagogic” meaning of that event, which is, according to Dante, “the exit of the holy soul from the slavery of this corruption to the liberty of eternal glory.”<sup>[46](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn046)</sup> This interpretation of the Exodus is fundamental to Blake’s symbolism: the work which throws most light on Blake here is the Wisdom of Solomon, in which the plague of darkness, for instance, is treated as a symbol of the brooding terrors of the opaque Selfhood in language very close to Blake:

For while they thought that they were unseen in their secret sins, they were sundered one from another by a dark curtain of forgetfulness, stricken with terrible awe, and sore troubled by spectral forms.<sup>[47](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn047)</sup>

With the coming of Jesus or the seventh Eye the finale of history begins. The first consolidation of tyranny established to meet this new threat was the “Church Paul,”<sup>[48](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn048)</sup> absorbing Jesus into the old Pharisaic legalism. Next comes his further absorption into the Classical tyranny, represented by the Church Constantine, then the establishment of the female-will culture of the Middle Ages, the chivalric code and Madonna-worship associated with Charlemagne and Arthur. Finally comes the twenty-seventh Church in Luther and the Renaissance, the tyrannical precipitate of which is Deism. These twenty-seven “Heavens,” as they are called, roll round us in a circle forever, and Deism is spiritually as far from Eden as Babylon or Egypt or Rome ever were.<sup>[49](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn049)</sup>

Only with the twenty-eighth, the last phase associated with Milton, does the apocalypse get under way (Swedenborg, we remember, said it began in Blake’s birth year). Milton himself represents an imaginative penetration of the spiritual world unequalled in Christian poetry, and Blake, especially in his poem on Milton, attempts to clarify his vision still further. The apocalypse proper begins with the French and American revolutions, when the revolutionary iconoclasm of Orc, which was made manifest in Jesus, returns to the world to complete the seventh cycle. Then, as St. John says:

In the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God should be finished, as he hath declared to his servants the prophets.<sup>[50](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn050)</sup>

Opposed to this is the development of empiric thought denying the reality of all states above Generation, which only needs a little pushing until it becomes a materialist tyranny so complete that humanity will finally be able to see all its ramifications as part of a single unified falsehood, an epiphany of Satan.

• 8 •

BUT what is Satan? In the human mind he is the death-impulse or Selfhood which reduces men to becoming either death-dealing tyrants or torpid and inert victims of them. He is the “accuser” or principle of unbelief which makes tyrants revengeful and victims terrified, this mutual interaction of revenge and terror being the basis of fallen society. In this world Satan is therefore the objective counterpart of the death-impulse, the dead body or inert matter for which the most direct symbols are rock and sand. Yet matter is superior to chaos, and chaos to nonentity. The fact that physical death does not sink below matter must represent part of the same stabilizing of existence which is represented by the “Mundane Shell” and the body of Adam. Adam is the “Limit of Contraction,” and Satan is the “Limit of Opacity”; Adam and Satan, therefore, are the bounds put to the Fall in life and death respectively. Hell, the abode of Satan, is Ulro, the world of abstractions which in aggregate are matter, nature, reason and memory. In Generation subject and object are in a relation which appears in Beulah more clearly as that of male and female, or lover and beloved. Hence Satan is described by Blake as a “Hermaphrodite,” a sterile fusion of subject and object into an indivisible abstract or spectral World.

The Biblical account of the Fall, in the story of Adam and Eve, presents us with the two “Druidic” symbols of the tree and the serpent. Serpent-worship is, like human sacrifice, part of the psychology of the Fall. The serpent with its tail in its mouth is a perfect emblem of the Selfhood: an earth-bound, cold-blooded and often venomous form of life imprisoned in its own cycle of death and rebirth. As for the tree, there were two trees in Paradise, the tree of eternal life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. The former represents the unity of man with God: the account in Genesis seems to imply, though we shall look at it again, an abstract or superhuman God who is said to be jealous of man and expels him from Eden to prevent him from reaching for that tree. The restoration of the tree of life to man is therefore one of the features of the apocalypse. The water of life, symbolized in the Bible by the four rivers of Eden, which actually are the four senses of unfallen man, is also to be given freely to man after the last day.<sup>[51](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn051)</sup>

The other tree symbolizes several different aspects of the Selfhood. It is a tree of morality, conveying the knowledge that one lives a good life in a bad world by using the minimum of imagination.  It is a symbol of nature, of the separate objective body of Generation which Blake always associates with the vegetable world. In the ninth book of *Paradise Lost*, after Eve has eaten of the apple, she bows to the tree and does it homage.<sup>[52](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn052)</sup> There, in the worship of an external spirit, is the beginning and end of all idolatry. But above all, this upas-tree of death which lost man Paradise symbolizes mystery, the elusiveness of the object. This aspect of it, though presented as a different tree, is beautifully brought out in Milton’s banyan, which continually enroots itself in the earth, spreading a dense vegetable thicket wider and wider as it grows. When Adam and Eve shrink into the banyan grove to conceal and cover their fallen bodies, they are symbolically still in front of the tree of mystery. The growth of this tree is described in “The Human Abstract,” which ends:

The Gods of the earth and sea

Sought thro’ Nature to find this Tree;

But their search was all in vain:

There grows one in the Human Brain.

In this larger symbolic form the tree appears in Northern mythology as the world-ash Yggdrasil.

It was the serpent that tempted Adam to fall (it is not called the devil until much later), and the serpent then fell himself. But as Adam in Blake is the present human body which was established after a gigantic period, the serpent must among other things symbolize the fallen body of man. The “serpent body” forced to the ground to eat dust and clay is the constricted body of the natural man. The serpent’s ability to shed its skin, on the other hand, makes it an emblem of death and rebirth, the persistence of the “living form” as a species in time. (There is no explicit association in Genesis between the bodies of Adam and Eve and that of the serpent, but there is a suggestive hint of one in *Paradise Lost* which may have attracted Blake’s notice:

As when he wash’d his servants’ feet, so now

As Father of his Family he clad

Thir nakedness with Skins of Beasts, or slain,

Or as the Snake with youthful Coat repaid.<sup>[53](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn053)</sup>)

Orc, or human imagination trying to burst out of the body, is often described as a serpent bound on the tree of mystery, dependent upon it, yet struggling to get free. The erection of the brazen serpent in the wilderness therefore represents in disguised form the more clearly symbolic story of the earlier poem. The energy of Orc which broke away from Egypt was perverted into the Sinaitic moral code, and this is symbolized by the nailing of Orc in the form of a serpent to a tree. This was a prototype of the crucifixion of Jesus, and the crucifixion, the image of divine visionary power bound to a natural world symbolized by a tree of mystery, is the central symbol of the fallen world. Parallel to the image of the crucified Christ is the figure of Prometheus chained to a rock, imagination bound to Ulro. Both Titans were victims of Zeus-Jehovah or Urizen, and both are allotropic forms of Orc. Jesus redeems Adam in Generation; the Promethean fire will burn the “opaque” world to ashes in the final consummation. Some idea of this serpent-symbolism seems to underlie the Gnostic cult of the Ophites, who worshiped the serpent as Jesus and considered Jehovah an evil being.

Now if the fall of the serpent symbolizes the fall of Adam, or rather the fall of humanity to the Adamic form, the serpent before its fall must represent the Druid culture which preceded Adam. That culture in its dying stages was a period of ferocious war accompanied by prodigies of human sacrifice. It was the tyrannical side of the Selfhood run rampant. There were no quiescent victims, for human beings were still too strong: there were only the sacrificed captives. The unfallen serpent, then, would not be a scaly and shiny reptile, nor even the curious Miltonic animal that slides around on its rear, but a creature of terrible strength and beauty like the tiger, its scales glittering precious stones, its head crested with gold, the image of tyrannical pride, like Milton’s Satan when his form had not yet lost all her original brightness.

It is this serpent, man’s Selfhood or desire to assert rather than create, that stands between man and Paradise: the cherub with the flaming sword who guards the tree of life therefore is that demonic “serpent.” The account in Genesis does not suggest this, but Ezekiel, in denouncing the King of Tyre, makes the identification, and relates the king’s tyranny to it:

Thou hast been in Eden the garden of God; every precious stone was thy covering, the sardius, topaz, and the diamond, the beryl, the onyx, and the jasper, the sapphire, the emerald, and the carbuncle, and gold: the workmanship of thy tabrets and of thy pipes was prepared in thee in the day that thou wast created.

Thou art the anointed cherub that covereth; and I have set thee so: thou wast upon the holy mountain of God; thou hast walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire.

Thou was perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast created, till iniquity was found in thee.

By the multitude of thy merchandise they have filled the midst of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned: therefore I will cast thee as profane out of the mountain of God: and I will destroy thee, O covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire.<sup>[54](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn054)</sup>

The Greeks have preserved the memory of this Covering Cherub in their myth of the Hesperides, the Paradisal islands of the west under the domain of Atlas, where a mysterious tree with golden fruit is guarded by a dragon.

The fallen serpent is a worm “seventy inches long,” lasting for “sixty winters”<sup>[55](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn055)</sup>; the demonic serpent or Covering Cherub is a dragon. The former is the helplessness of the victim; the latter the ferocity of the tyrant. But the dragon, in the Bible and elsewhere, is a symbol of something far worse than Satan the “Limit of Opacity”: he is a symbol of the chaos which underlies it, waiting to burst in and overwhelm the entire cosmos. For the dragon in all mythologies is simply a conventional form of the monstrous, the unreal, the fire-breathing terror which the hero makes tangible only by killing. All monsters in heroic literature are, like Grendel, sprung of the race of Cain or the death-impulse, but much more hideous than this is the horror of something mysterious and undefined, the power of darkness. The creation of the fallen world is an “act of Mercy” because the stability and permanence of the dead inorganic world forms a barrier between our weak struggling lives and the total annihilation of all being in chaos.

The symbol of chaos in the Bible is water, specifically the sea, though sometimes conceived as “waters under the earth”; the wavering, uncertain, indefinite form which Blake hates so in art as the antithesis of what the imagination outlines. God created the world, Genesis begins, out of water or chaos. The Mesopotamian myth from which this was derived personifies this chaos as a sea-serpent or water-monster and God as a young hero who creates the cosmos by slaying the dragon. This is not in Genesis, but references to a divine struggle with chaos, which finally resulted in the waters being subdued and gathered into definite places, are scattered all through the Bible, especially in the Psalms. A deluge in the Bible therefore signifies a defeat of the imagination; and the fall of Albion began with a deluge which drowned Atlantis and produced the ocean that bears its name. The drying-up of water, on the other hand, as in the passage across the Red Sea, implies an imaginative advance. According to Job the power of God is nowhere more strikingly manifest than in keeping the sea within bounds, and in the apocalypse there shall be no more sea.<sup>[56](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn056)</sup>

This dragon of chaos is usually called Leviathan in the Bible, and Leviathan, the Covering Cherub in the fallen world, represents not only the tyranny of nature but the social tyranny among men which is part of it. The title of Hobbes’ defense of tyranny is symbolically quite accurate, for the King of Egypt is called Leviathan by Ezekiel, just as the King of Tyre is called the Covering Cherub. Job, pondering the problem of injustice, finally realizes that the cruelty of man to man, the cruelty of nature to man, and the cruelty which fate inflicts, and God seems to inflict, on man, are all part of an indivisible pattern of tyranny, the tyranny of the state of nature. The poem ends in a vision of this in the form of two huge and untamable monsters, Leviathan, the “King over all the children of pride,”<sup>[57](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn057)</sup> being the more important. Had Job gone on, they would have merged into the dragon guarding Paradise. Had he gone still further, he would have reached his apocalypse or revelation of Paradise: that-is, he would have pushed the dragon out of the way and walked boldly in.

In some places Leviathan is called Rahab, and Rahab is also the name of the harlot who received the spies of Joshua, and whose life was spared in the conquest of the Promised Land.<sup>[58](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn058)</sup> It is difficult to see what these two Rahabs can have to do with one another until we come to the Apocalypse and find there a Great Whore sitting on the back of a red dragon referred to as “that old serpent which is called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world.”<sup>[59](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn059)</sup> This beast, a water-monster, is evidently the Covering Cherub seen from inside Paradise, and two smaller monsters, corresponding to the Leviathan and Behemoth of Job, are offspring of his. The Great Whore’s rich clothes and precious stones recall the gilded serpent; she represents all human tyranny, for her name is Babylon and she sits on the seven hills of Rome; she is all forms of state religion, for she is drunk with the blood of the saints; she is chaos, for she sits on many waters; and her whoredom represents the possessive love of the jealous Selfhood. She is, in short, the ultimate fallen form of nature or the “female will,” Enitharmon and Vala combined in the time-world. Apocalypse means revelation, and the Great Whore is the chief thing revelation comes to remove, which is Mystery, a word used by Paul to refer to another consolidation of evil in the somewhat different form of the Antichrist.<sup>[60](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn060)</sup> The Great Whore of the Bible is the Medusa who turns men to stone, the *femme fatale* of the romantic poets whose kiss is death, whose love is annihilation, whose continual posing of the unanswerable riddle of life in this world is reflected in the mysterious female smiles of the Sphinx and Mona Lisa; and whose capacity for self-absorption has haunted art from ancient Crete to modern fashion magazines. The visionary sees nature as a veil (the sound-association with “Vala” should be noted) between himself and reality: the tearing of the veil of the mystery-temple by Jesus is therefore the first act in the apocalypse. As the vision consolidates, nature takes the human form of a beautiful harlot. The Whore and her beast, then, are the obstacles blocking up the view of the unfallen world; and when the Whore is stripped and burned all the evils of the Selfhood go from the Abyss, the chaos underlying matter, into the permanent second death of nonexistence.

In the Eddas Leviathan is the world-encircling serpent Midgard whom Thor once nearly landed on a fishing trip and once nearly lifted off the ground in the form of a cat. Behemoth is the great wolf Fenri, bound in this world by a chain called “Devouring” (a word often associated by Blake with the Selfhood), formed of nonexistent things like stones’ roots and fishes’ breath: this passage reads very like a Blakean satire on abstract ideas.<sup>[61](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn061)</sup> In the apocalypse described by the Sibyl in the Völuspa both wolf and serpent break loose: the former’s jaws stretch to the top of heaven; the latter’s poison is vomited over the earth.

There are in Blake, as in Swedenborg, two suns, one alive and unfallen, the source of life and light, and one dead, a “phantasy of evil Man.”<sup>[62](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn062)</sup> The latter is the zodiacal sun, symbolizing the fallen conception of eternity as indefinite or endless recurrence. The image for this is the circle; and the serpent in a circular form with its tail in its mouth is therefore a perfect symbol of the zodiac, being so employed by the Druids. The precious stones with which the Covering Cherub or unfallen serpent is traditionally adorned then became zodiacal signs. In the priestly cult of Judaism the twelve stones on Aaron’s breastplate, according to Josephus, represented the zodiac<sup>[63](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn063)</sup>; and the twelve sons of Jacob are connected with a zodiacal myth. This zodiacal pattern, which is frequent in Blake, always has the sinister significance of the unending cyclic repetition of time. Albion, for instance, has twelve sons associated with the “starry wheels,” and their relation to the twelve sons of Jacob, who represent humanity, symbolizes the interdependence of the universe we see and the bodies which compel us to see it in that form. A similar myth may underlie the passage in Malory about the tomb of twelve kings with twelve images, each holding a candle, with Arthur above, like the Covering Cherub again, holding a drawn sword. Merlin the prophet said that when the candles went out the quest of the Sangreal (the medieval symbol of the apocalypse) would be achieved.<sup>[64](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn064)</sup> The general meaning of such a passage as the following should now be a little clearer:

In thoughts perturb’d they rose from the bright ruins, silent following

The fiery King, who sought his ancient temple, serpent-form’d,

That stretches out its shady length along the Island white….

There stand the venerable porches that high-towering rear

Their oak-surrounded pillars, form’d of massy stones, uncut

With tool, stones precious, such eternal in the heavens,

Of colours twelve, few known on earth, give light in the opake,

Plac’d in the order of the stars….

Then was the serpent temple form’d, image of infinite

Shut up in finite revolutions, and man became an Angel,

Heaven a mighty circle turning, God a tyrant crown’d.<sup>[65](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn065)</sup>

All over the world serpent and dragon myths descended from the Druids are found. St. George and the Dragon, Apollo and the Python, Beowulf and Grendel, Perseus and the Medusa who forces man down from Generation into the stony world of Ulro, are all images of the victory of the creative imagination over chaos. The Laocoon group originally portrayed, according to Blake, Jehovah and the two limits of the fallen world, Satan and Adam; the strangling serpents again represent the Fall.<sup>[66](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn066)</sup> Traditions of a Covering Cherub and a Red Dragon survived also in the North. Gray’s *Triumphs of Owen* tells us in a note that the latter was the device of the Cadwallader family, and this is repeated in the name of Arthur’s father Uther Pendragon. The Arthurian legend contains many reminiscences of the more ancient one of Albion, of whom Arthur himself is a distorted reminiscence:

The stories of Arthur are the acts of Albion, applied to a Prince of the fifth century, who conquered Europe, and held the Empire of the world in the dark age, which the Romans never again recovered.<sup>[67](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn067)</sup>

This means that Blake accepts, not Geoffrey’s literal account of the conquest of the Roman Empire by Arthur, but the symbolic meaning of that account; that in the Dark Ages Northern and Teutonic races, with their prophetess-worship which later developed into the Court of Love, overthrew the Roman Empire and established the Madonna-cult of the Roman Church. In Arthurian mythology, therefore, we should expect to find both Albion and Leviathan symbolism applied to Arthur in a rather confusing way. There is much to connect Arthur with Satan: we have mentioned the story in Malory which makes him the Covering Cherub, and in Malory also Arthur has a dream of a gilded serpent who turns out to be himself.<sup>[68](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn068)</sup> On the other hand, the legend that Joseph of Arimathea brought the Holy Grail to Glastonbury, while it symbolizes in part the establishment of the Roman Church in Britain, also contains echoes of the Atlantic Golden Age in which the feet of Jesus walked on English mountains. The relation of Arthur to Albion, in short, is very similar to that of Joshua to Jesus in the Bible, and Blake is anxious to keep the genuine vision disentangled from the historical distortion of it.

But if both the Arthurian legend and the myths of Adam in Genesis are later forms of a far older tale connected with Albion and Atlantis, it follows that Milton’s long hesitation between Arthurian and Biblical themes, on the assumption that they were mutually exclusive, was unnecessary. Spenser got this point much clearer in *The Faerie Queene*, the first book of which deals with the slaying of a dragon by a knight of Arthur’s court. If we look closely at Spenser’s allegory, we can see that he is using the same symbols from the Bible that Blake is using, and in much the same way. St. George sets out to rescue the kingdom of Una from a monster. This kingdom was originally the Garden of Eden, Una’s father being addressed as “king of Eden,”<sup>[69](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn069)</sup> and the present earth. That is, Una’s parents represent a Golden Age in which the earth appeared as Paradise. The “infernall feend”<sup>[70](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn070)</sup> which expelled them is therefore the Covering Cherub, and St. George’s real quest is the recovery of Paradise and the achievement of the apocalypse. His chief enemies throughout are Duessa, Blake’s Rahab, who is identified with the Great Whore, an old man, Archimago, more or less Blake’s Urizen, and Orgoglio, the giant of pride, or rather of “jealousy.” The battle between St. George and “that old Dragon”<sup>[71](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn071)</sup> is fought in the Garden of Eden, St. George deriving his strength both from the tree of life and the water of life. Spenser, then, treats Arthurian and Biblical mythology with equal freedom as equally relative to an archetypal myth. Compared with him, Milton was badly hampered by an erroneous notion that the Biblical myth was “true” and the Arthurian one “false.”

• 9 •

As far as the poetic effect of Blake’s mythology goes, it cannot of course be denied that when a character is presented as an individual or a god and his relationship to an archetype is left to take care of itself, an advantage in vividness is often gained. Blake was, it is obvious, so conscious of the shape of his central myth that his characters become almost diagrammatic. The heroism of Orc or the ululation of Ololon do not impress us as human realities, like Achilles or Cassandra, but as intellectual ideographs. It all depends on whether the reader has a taste for this kind of metaphysical poetry or not, on whether he is willing to read so uncompromising an address to the intellectual powers. It is not necessary to assume that qualities of poetry which are certainly not in Blake are qualities which Blake tried and failed to produce. One looks in a poet for what is there, and what there is in Blake is a dialectic, an anatomy of poetry, a rigorously unified vision of the essential forms of the creative mind, piercing through its features to its articulate bones. The figure is perhaps not one that he would have approved: his own is:

I give you the end of a golden string,

Only wind it into a ball,

It will lead you in at Heaven’s gate

Built in Jerusalem’s wall.<sup>[72](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch05fn072)</sup>

And if we have any doubts about the value of Blake’s method, we have only to compare the poetic value of his reading of the Bible with that of the corporeal understanding. To the imaginative eye, the Bible begins in a world of chaos without form and void, continues through primitive legend and history to the prophets, proceeds from their far-off visions of a Redeemer and a New Jerusalem to Jesus, and from Jesus to the final blinding flash of revelation, the vision of the completed City of God and the disappearance of nature. To the corporeal understanding, the Bible begins in historical reminiscence and barbarous cosmology which, if often repulsive, is at any rate intelligible, proceeds to some irascible sermons on morality, the social insight of which is concealed in a good deal of fustian about a Messiah and a Last Day, goes on to the life and tragic death of a saintly teacher whose refined ethics were distorted into a grotesque myth by unintelligent disciples, and finally ends in the most impenetrably turgid allegory ever devised in language—if one can call its illiterate mixture of Greek words and Hebrew syntax a language. To the corporeal understanding, in short, the Bible’s final “Revelation” is an utter mystery: that is, it bears the same name as the Great Whore whose destruction it foretells. A precisely similar paradox lurks in the mysterious symbolism of Blake.
