|                               |                   |
|-------------------------------|-------------------|
| 10 | *COMUS AGONISTES* |

IN 1800, after Blake had been working for some time on *The Four Zoos*, he was offered a retreat at the village of Felpham in Sussex, by his patron and friend Hayley, himself a poet of sorts, who had also patronized Cowper. Blake was, like most major English writers, a born Cockney who quickly became miserable long outside London, but he naturally did not know that then, and went off very happily to live under Hayley’s protection. It was almost the first “event” in a busy but very quiet life, and Blake planned that his stay in Felpham would be a “slumber” in a Beulah of dormant life during which he would gather together all his powers and concentrate them on clarifying the scheme of his epic and the technique of his engraving. He never ceased to speak of it as a slumber, but a quickly developing antagonism between his temperament and Hayley’s soon made it a slumber full of nightmares: not an idyllic pastoral interlude or a sheltered hibernation, but an ordeal by fire, a temptation in a wilderness of fashionable smugness. The net result of the Felpham interval, for Blake’s canon, was that *The Four Zoas* was abandoned and *Milton* and *Jerusalem* engraved instead.

In an early prose pamphlet which we know that Blake read, for he quotes from it in his notes to Reynolds, Milton distinguishes the “brief” and the “diffuse” epic.<sup>[1](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn001)</sup> The latter is the full-dress affair in twelve books, or some multiple of twelve, for which Homer and Virgil are the models. Milton’s example of the former, to which his own *Paradise Regained* is evidently a contribution, is the Book of Job. Blake’s three epics, *The Four Zoas, Milton* and *Jerusalem*, are all “brief,” but they seem to be, as we should perhaps expect, fragments of an original plan for a single “diffuse” one.

With the Felpham period we get for the first time a series of letters of some continuity to aid us—and very treacherous allies they are. It is quite impossible to relate them exactly to the existing body of Blake’s work. The first explicit statement of what Blake is doing comes in a letter to his friend Butts dated April 1803:

But none can know the Spiritual Acts of my three years’ Slumber on the banks of the Ocean, unless he has seen them in the Spirit, or unless he should read My long Poem descriptive of those Acts; for I have in these three years composed an immense number of verses on One Grand Theme, Similar to Homer’s Iliad or Milton’s Paradise Lost, the Persons & Machinery intirely new to the Inhabitants of Earth (some of the Persons Excepted)….

This passage could conceivably refer to *The Four Zoas*, or to *Milton*, or to both together. But, unless we adopt the very unlikely hypothesis of a lost poem, Blake’s language is rather curious. It is easy to understand why some of Blake’s readers should think of the Prophecies as much longer poems than they really are, but why Blake himself should speak of a poem of only a little over four thousand lines as “immense,” and compare it to the *Iliad* and *Paradise Lost* in a way that suggests an equality of length, is puzzling. *Milton* is only half as long as *The Four Zoas*, and *Jerusalem* can hardly have been written by then in anything like its present form. In July Blake speaks of “a Sublime Allegory, which is now perfectly completed into a Grand Poem.”<sup>[2](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn002)</sup> This does not literally apply to *The Four Zoas*, which was never perfectly completed into anything, cannot apply to the still unwritten *Jerusalem*, and yet seems to refer to a bigger poem than our present *Milton.* Apparently the latter, now in two books, was originally planned as a “diffuse” epic in twelve: the *Milton* that we possess, however, is complete in itself.

Possibly *The French Revolution* as we have it, the first of many promised books, represents Blake’s first epic plan: if so, the theme would have been simply a revolutionary struggle of Orc and Urizen with Orc ultimately victorious. When the conception of Los grew clear in Blake’s mind, he began on the deeper and subtler theme of the Books of Urizen, Los and Ahania. That too seemed to leave out the real beginning of the Fall, the subjection of man to the female will, so Blake moved on to a “Song of the Aged Mother,” an epic to be named *Vala.* Vala in her turn suggested the fourfold Zoa scheme, and *The Four Zoas* was begun as a revision of *Vala.* At the end of *The Four Zoas*, the same process repeated itself in Blake’s mind. The symbols in which his vision had finally consolidated, Rahab, Tirzah, Satan, Albion, Jesus, Jerusalem, Los and the Spectre of Urthona, formed now a solid structural framework in his mind, in which the rather vaporous Zoas and their emanations, clouds in the brain of the Albion who was his real hero, and veils concealing the Jerusalem who was his real heroine, began to play a minor role. Meanwhile, his change of opinion about the nature of his sojourn at Felpham had brought an entirely new theme into his mind which demanded his full attention. This was the theme of the contest of Palamabron and Satan, a symbolic transformation of his clash with Hayley, first introduced in Night VIII of *The Four Zoas*, where it is somewhat out of place, and with which *Milton* begins. The idea of writing a poem on Milton, which Blake had probably pondered for some time, then combined with this, for reasons we shall presently explain. The poem he had written on the Zoas, the poem he was to write on Palamabron, Satan and Milton, and the further plan, not then clearly visualized, of a *Four Zoas* rewritten in terms of a more fundamental symbolism, may at one time have coalesced in Blake’s mind as a single gigantic epic scheme which certainly “existed,” though doubtless not in any written-out form.

From this nebulous epic the *Milton* and *Jerusalem* we now have were precipitated. Once they were finished, there was no longer any real place for *The Four Zoas* in Blake’s canon, which in any case he had already used as a quarry for the later poems. Considering the great beauty and variety of the poem, the vitality of the sketches in its manuscript, and the fact that without it we do not possess enough of Blake’s symbolic apparatus to understand the later books at all, it is unlikely that Blake intended to drop it altogether. We have to remember that much of Blake’s obscurity is due to the fact that he never in his whole life received the smallest public encouragement to complete and perfect his canon: the public, of course, never knew that there was a canon. If a revised and shortened version of *The Four Zoas* could ever have been used as the prelude to a trilogy, the three poems taken together might then have made up a single “diffuse” epic of the requisite number of lines and books. But as it is *The Four Zoas* remains forlornly outside the engraved works, though as late as 1809, in the catalogue to his ill-fated Exhibition, Blake is still speaking of a poem he has written about the fall of a fourfold Man into a Strong, a Beautiful and an Ugly Man, which “if God please,” he would like to “publish”—whatever that word may signify.<sup>[3](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn003)</sup>

A bald summary of what happens in *Milton* is unpromising enough. It begins with material taken over from *The Book of Urizen* and *The Four Zoas* about the creation, and goes on to a myth of a dispute between Palamabron and Satan which obviously suggests the relations between Blake and Hayley at Felpham. Then Milton, in eternity, determines to “go to Eternal Death,” which means physical life, and after a long struggle he enters this world and reincarnates himself in Blake. The first book ends with a moment of illumination in which the whole of reality is absorbed within the perceiving mind of the poet. Then, we are told, Milton’s purpose in reincarnating himself was to redeem his emanation, Ololon, who is called “Sixfold,” recalling the three wives and three daughters who kept Milton reminded of the “female will” during his life. The descent of Ololon, the final redemption of Milton-Blake, now united also with Los, and the casting-off of Satan-Hayley in the shape of Antichrist form the subject of the second book. To the corporeal understanding this is a sufficiently absurd farrago, which implies that if we put our intellectual powers to work on it it will emerge a great imaginative masterpiece.

• 2 •

WHILE no literary critic of any experience will make much effort to define his terms, we have suggested that the word “epic” has a more technical meaning than simply “long poem,” as Milton implies when he speaks of brief epics. The function of the epic, in its origin, seems to be primarily to teach the nation, or whatever we call the social unit which the poet is addressing, its own traditions. These traditions are chiefly concerned with the national religion and the national history, and both are presented in terms of the activities of “Giant forms,” or beings at once human and divine, who are called “gods” in the religious context and “heroes” in the historical one. The religion is not theological nor the history documentary: both are mythopoeic. As the epic mode of thought, both in its visual form and in its universality of range, is most typical of a culture in the first flush of its vigor, the major epic tends to come rather early in the nation’s history and hence may form, if it is great enough, a sort of matrix for the whole cultural development that follows it. Thus the entire attitude to life that we think of as “Hellenic” seems to grow organically out of Homer, and the reverence in which the Homeric poems were held indicates that this is something more than a retrospective illusion. The Indian epics have gone a step further, and have actually absorbed much of this later development, the *Bhagavadgita* itself being an episode from one of them.

The Bible has gone further still in consolidating a national culture. The basis of the Bible is, like that of the epic, religious and historical saga concerned with anthropomorphic gods and theomorphic men, part of it legendary history and part prophetic vision. But the Bible is neither a single work of art like the *Iliad*, nor an expanded one like the *Mahabharata:* it is the historical product of a visionary tradition. It records a continuous reshaping of the earlier and more primitive visions, and as it goes on it becomes more explicitly prophetic, until the confused legends of an obscure people take the form of the full cyclic vision of fall, redemption and apocalypse. The Old Testament begins with an account of an escape from Egypt into Canaan led by Joshua, and ends with the prophetic allegorical recreation of this event: the escape of the imagination from a “furnace of iron” into a City of God through the power of a divine humanity or Messiah. The Gospels consolidate this vision of the Messiah into the vision of Jesus, who has the same name as Joshua, and the proof of the events in Jesus’ life, as recorded in the Gospels, is referred not to contemporary evidence but to what the Old Testament prophets had said would be true of the Messiah. The imaginative recreation of Old Testament visions in the New Testament, reaching its climax in the dense mosaic of allusions and quotations in the Apocalypse, merely completes a process which goes on to a considerable extent within the Old Testament itself.

Hellenic literature, from Blake’s point of view, shows a gradual decline from the visionary clarity of Homer and the dramatists through the abstract reflective thinking of Plato and Aristotle to a final exhaustion in mystical or skeptical contemplations of the cosmic abyss which is Ulro. We can see something similar in the Bible, if we compare Genesis with Ecclesiastes, for instance; but the unique appeal of the Bible to the religious imagination is connected very intimately with its resistance to abstract thought. And this resistance is largely due to the integrity of the tradition it records, to the fact that the Hebrew prophets and poets continually recreated the historical and religious visions they inherited, refusing to follow the Orc cycle into a Urizenic sophisticated decadence. Hellenic culture, then, illustrates Blake’s theory of the Orc cycle; Hebraic culture illustrates his other doctrine of the incorporation of history and tradition into eternal vision, the building of the ruins of time into the mansions of eternity<sup>[4](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn004)</sup> which in his symbolism is the subduing of the Spectre of Urthona by Los.

Let us now look at the English epic to see whether its traditions are Hellenic or Hebraic in shape. A peculiarity of English literature is that its national and religious mythologies do not have the same origin, its religion being imported. It may be partly because of this that in its early “Gothic” period it did not produce a poet corresponding to Homer or Virgil. When Chaucer constructs his pantheon of the essential “Giant forms” in the English nation, he simply projects the life around him, giving us a vision of English Christianity more or less as it appeared to him in experience. In spite of Blake’s masterly analysis, the *Canterbury Tales* is in too chaotic a state for anyone to say definitely what its complete form would have been, though in the so-called “Marriage Group” at least we can see a faint trace of a larger outline. Langland, whose spiritual affinity with Blake we have mentioned, makes a prodigious effort to combine his English and his Christian perspectives; but it did not occur to him that historical legends had any place in such an effort, and whether he was right or not, the unity of his epic is perhaps more doctrinal than visionary.

It is not until after the religious capital of England had been moved from Rome to London that Spenser gives us a full epic synthesis of English Christianity in a “darke conceit” which is partly a vision of the purified English Christian Church and partly a vision of English history in terms of Arthurian symbolism. These are known to critics as the moral and historical allegories respectively. Spenser has a clear grasp of the unity of British and Christian mythology, but perhaps Blake would have said that an orthodox censor in his mind causes him to make more use of disguise and camouflage in working out his theme than a prophet should do. For example, he proposes to present in Prince Arthur a Renaissance “complete man,” and as to a Christian the only complete man is also complete God, the association of Arthur with Jesus would take him straight into the symbolism of Blake’s great hymn, “And did those feet in ancient time,” which opens *Milton.* But it is not clear that he has the nerve for this. However, he does, in the fourth book of his unfinished epic, speak of Chaucer as reborn in him, in a passage very important for the proper understanding of Blake’s attitude to Milton.<sup>[5](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn005)</sup>

Milton, who told Dryden that his “original”—quite a strong word—was Spenser, eliminated the ancient British myth from his epic, but still makes his view of Christianity an illustration of the contemporary history of England; and in *Paradise Lost* the four states of existence, heaven, Eden (which is Blake’s Beulah), the fallen world and hell, are much more sharply outlined than they are in Spenser’s ambiguous fairyland. If Milton had not been checkmated by the failure of the British nation to purify itself, national and Christian symbolism would probably have been at least as closely unified in his epic as they are in *Comus* and *Lycidas*, and unified around the theme of apocalypse rather than that of creation and fall. Here Spenser had an advantage, for the movement to purify English Christianity in his day had not, from his point of view, failed. But the very fact that Milton has to record a failure causes him to illustrate all the more clearly what we have just implied: that the later a poet comes in his tradition, the more explicitly he has to deal with the question of his personal relation to the society of his time. Milton thinks of himself continually as an inspired prophet sent by God to present his vision to the English people; and if we examine the argument of *Paradise Lost* we can see how far this goes. Adam’s fall lost man the paradise of liberty, therefore an interaction of tyrant and victim, of moral good and moral evil, a reign of law and compulsion, will be the essential feature of fallen human life until the apocalypse. In such a society the visionary or messenger of God will inevitably be a neglected or even persecuted prophet. Thus in Milton’s attempt to justify the ways of God to man the question of the role of the visionary in human life is of cardinal importance, in fact almost the moral of the poem.

Now any major English poet following Milton will be ambitious to produce a fourth English epic, the unified vision of English Christianity which is appropriate to his age. But he will find that between Milton’s time and his own English Christianity has declined from a sectarian sunset into the gaslight of Deism. In Blake’s symbolism, he will be in the position indicated at the end of Night VIII of *The Four Zoos*, at the close of the twenty-seventh Church, or age of Luther, which is the last phase of the seventh cycle of history, the “Eye” of Jesus. Ahead of him is the program suggested by the growth of Deism and the ascendancy of Urizen, a skeptical exhaustion of spirit leading to warfare on a vast scale, the expansion and collapse of huge empires, and a new Dark Age pending a rebirth of Orc in America. He has three courses open to him, two of which are wrong. He may follow the Augustan tradition, join the Deists and write Urizenic poetry like the *Essay on Man.* If he feels unable to do this, the theme of the nature of genius and of the poet’s role in society then becomes central in his vision, for if he cannot interpret Deism he should know the reasons for his opposition to it. His second course is to visualize his mission as a rebirth of a new Orc. The “rich-hair’d youth of morn” in Collins’ *Ode on the Poetical Character*, the youth with flashing eyes and floating hair in *Kubla Khan*, Shelley’s Prometheus, and, in a more carefully considered context, Keats’s Endymion, are all, in terms of Blake’s symbolism, visions of the poet as Orc, like Blake’s own painting of the “Glad Day.” But Orc is a circular conception, and whether the poet attempts to celebrate the triumph either of him or of Urizen, what he is really celebrating in both cases is the collapse of all progress toward a conclusion of history; in Blake’s symbolism, the return of man from “Luther” to where he started six thousand years ago, or “Adam.” In Deism the nation has reached the point at which “common sense,” or the fallen vision of the world, becomes its dogmatic confession of faith. But this faith assumes the finality of the two primary categories of common sense, time and space. Hence the third course open to the poet in an age of Deism is, first, to visualize the reversibility of time and space, to see the linear sequence of history as a single form; and, second, to see the tradition behind him as a single imaginative unity. These are, more or less, the themes of *Jerusalem* and *Milton* respectively.

Blake told Butts that he was not the author but the secretary of his epic; yet he objects violently to a clear inference from this which he meets in Plato. “Plato has made Socrates say that Poets & Prophets do not know or Understand what they write or Utter,” he says: “this is a most Pernicious Falshood. If they do not, pray is an inferior kind to be call’d Knowing?”<sup>[6](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn006)</sup> That is, is the term “knowledge” to be restricted to the passive awareness of an outward object, and refused to the conscious state of controlled inspiration in which poetry is created? Yet Blake’s retort does not really meet the point of the *Ion*, where Socrates puts his finger on one of the central paradoxes of art: that the most vivid and obviously inspired art as a matter of fact does often come from artists who are quite unaware of the larger implications of what they are doing, or have deliberately ignored them in order to concentrate their powers on the immediate task in hand. We have even suggested that Blake’s awareness of these implications makes his own characters more ideographic than they should be in a work of art. We now have part of the answer to this objection, if it is one, an answer indicated by the opening of *Milton*, where a number of Classical writers, including Plato, are attacked and contrasted with the “more consciously and professedly Inspired Men” of the Bible.

The extent to which a poet may be conscious, in the narrower sense, of the implications of his own work, depends partly on how late he comes in his cultural tradition. It is clear that the question of the poet’s relation to society bulks much larger in Milton than in Spenser, and in Spenser than in Chaucer. But a poet born with Deists for contemporaries will find his very right to exist questioned from the start, for dogmatic common sense assigns him at best only a decorative function in society. Again, his imaginative self-consciousness will depend partly on the nature of his tradition. The imagination in Blake *is* the personality, the Selfhood routine that we usually think of as the personal life of the artist being to him purely generic. The Hebrew prophets were far less impersonal than the Classical poets, because their vision was more intense and the social opposition to it more clear-cut; and Christian poetry, founded as it is on the Bible, inherits this personal tone. We can see this if we compare Dante and Milton with Homer and Virgil; though we should note that, for many reasons too complicated to explain here, the main line of Classical vision for Blake runs through Hesiod and Ovid rather than Homer and Virgil, and Hesiod and Ovid both gave their personal situations a place in their visions.

A poet who looks directly at his greatest predecessors and visualizes his own work as a concretion of a literary tradition is following the Hebraic rather than the Classical tradition, Los rather than Orc or Urizen, and is thereby doing what he can to lead culture back to the Golden Age. Pope may have meant something similar when he spoke of Virgil finding nature in Homer, though of course a poet should not be looking for nature. Dante found in Virgil not nature but a human imagination. As a new birth of imaginative power born at the winter solstice, dying on the dead tree and rising in the spring, Jesus was a rebirth of Orc: as the seventh “Eye” or vision of God, extracting a new visionary form out of the earlier “Jehovah” perception; as the Messiah who reformed the earlier prophecies into the new “Word” of a gospel, he was an incarnation of Los. When Blake imagines himself to be a reincarnation of Milton, then, the imaginative power that is reborn is not a different form, as in ordinary life, but the *same* form which in the process of transforming itself has purged and clarified its vision. The relation of Milton to Blake is not the ordinary relation of father to son, for the father never finds that his son is his own perfected self. Jesus, however, owes his divinity to the fact that he was the Son of the same nature as his Father, and the Word or clarified expression of that Father. For Blake, therefore, to imitate Milton is to imitate Jesus, just as, for Virgil, to imitate Homer was to imitate “nature.” And for Blake imitation is recreation.

There is no such thing as “reincarnation,” in the sense that a “soul” may leave a “body” and then enter another. “In Eternity,” says Blake, “one Thing never Changes into another Thing.”<sup>[7](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn007)</sup> But there are two possible forms of rebirth. One is the rebirth of Orc, the reappearance of life in a new form, which is the ordinary process of life. The other is the rebirth of Los, the recreation of one vision by another. Milton’s imagination was the real Milton, and a deliberate and conscious attempt to recreate his vision, as *Paradise Lost* was a deliberate and conscious attempt to recreate the vision of the Book of Genesis, is the rebirth of the real Milton into the imagination of the poet who makes this attempt. Every great vision is subject to the errors of its age and the Selfhood passions of its creator, but as a culture matures and the Selfhood vision of life consolidates, the imaginative vision also may, if the refining smith is at work within it, become increasingly more accurate and complete. Art does not improve its quality in the course of time, but it may lead to a visionary crisis in time as more and more of its palace becomes visible to poets. But much more is implied here than the commonplace doctrine of temporal immortality, that a poet survives in his work and in the adulation of posterity. If Jesus had been nothing more than a reborn Orc, he would have been merely one more cycle of energy in an unchanged nature, as Orc-Jesus is in *Europe:* the fact that human imagination reaches finality in Jesus is expressed in the doctrine that the end of time is his second coming. Similarly, when Blake visualizes himself as a reborn Milton, he expresses the corollary of this. If, in the Jesus cycle of history, one man’s vision returns to another and is recreated with final clarity, a permanent eternal form will appear in time and the fallen perspective of time as a vanishing current will be arrested.

Complete awareness on the part of the poet that the tradition of poetry behind him is not a purely linear sequence but an evolution of a single archetypal form is thus the same thing as a vision of Golgonooza, the whole of human life seen in the framework of fall and redemption outlined by the poets. Once this becomes clear, the missing link in *The Four Zoas* between the vision of contemporary Deism at the end of Night VIII and the beginning of the apocalypse in Night IX is supplied, whereupon the other epic theme, the historical and religious traditions of the nation, clears up as well. If any one visionary attains a final recreation of another’s vision, the Man Albion is fully awake in one brain, so that the possessor of that brain is a herald, who not only sees what is coming but is followed by it.

*Milton* and *Jerusalem*, then, are inseparable, and constitute a double epic, a prelude and fugue on the same subject, for *Milton* is Blake’s longest, greatest and most elaborate “Preludium.” The lyric “And did those feet in ancient time,” which opens *Milton*, is connected even more closely with the theme of *Jerusalem*, and our hymnbooks have rechristened it accordingly. *Milton* is an individual prologue to the omen of something universal coming on. The Last Judgment lies on the distant horizon, and is prophesied in the final line of the poem; and the “Western Gate,” the power to realize what the visionary sees to be real, symbolized by the Atlantic Ocean which still blots out Atlantis west of England, remains closed all through it. *Jerusalem* deals with the complementary awakening in man and the full apocalypse. One is resurrection and the other Last Judgment, corresponding to the first and second coming of Jesus.

If this sounds like a rather labored attempt to rationalize Blake’s choice of subject, it may not be without interest to examine his contemporary Wordsworth from the same point of view. While Blake was pondering his epic, Wordsworth had written part of his, and had begun with the theme of the poet’s mind. *The Prelude* is a “diffuse” epic because Wordsworth was dealing with a process of slow growth, and *Milton* is a “brief” one because Blake was dealing with an instant of illumination, but the identity of subject is clear enough. It is true that Wordsworth’s wish that Milton could be reincarnated in his own time never went further than a wish, but that in itself is not a fatal defect. Wordsworth then announced his next theme, the vision of a fallen world as Paradise or Atlantis:

… Paradise, and groves

Elysian, Fortunate Fields—like those of old

Sought in the Atlantic Main—why should they be

A history only of departed things,

Or a mere fiction of what never was?

For the discerning intellect of Man,

When wedded to this goodly universe

In love and holy passion, shall find these

A simple produce of the common day.<sup>[8](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn008)</sup>

Blake, who read this passage with keen interest, was dismayed to find that Wordsworth proposed to treat the relation of man and nature as one of correspondence, each being “exquisitely fitted” to the other. In other words, Wordsworth was a Deist or natural-religion worshiper, or at least had enough of that in him to injure his poetry. Hence he was unable to clarify his vision of the apocalypse, and his *Excursion* is merely a continuation of *The Prelude*, still concerned with the poetic mind and the inquiring subject. Worse, this mind is treated, not as imaginative, but as a solitary and withdrawn Selfhood, a “Recluse.” Further, Wordsworth does not develop a mythopoeic faculty—the discussion of mythology in the fourth book of *The Excursion* is a singularly barren one—for he does not really wish to see nature in human form.

The rather different case of Keats may also be mentioned, though Blake has left no evidence of having read Keats. *Endymion* is, in Blake’s terms, a brief epic concerned with the poet’s mind as a youthful Orc in the state of Beulah. Keats then went on from Beulah to Eden, from the garden of the moon to the city of the sun; and in *Hyperion* he began a vision of the fall of the sun along lines similar to Blake’s treatment of the fall of Luvah. But two problems remained unsolved. One was the exact nature of the influence which Milton should exert on the poem, though it was obvious to Keats that it had a peculiar relation to Milton. The other was how to give the theme of the poetic mind the same significance in *Hyperion* that it had had in *Endymion*, the opening of *The Fall of Hyperion* being presumably an attempt to deal with this. Whether this illustration from Keats is considered relevant or not, it is clear that the composition of the fourth English epic is a matter of some difficulty, and even that a fine poem of over four thousand lines should have been treated as a mere *brouillon* by a poet who would never have claimed any superiority to Wordsworth or Keats is hardly surprising.

• 3 •

MILTON opens with a “Bard’s Song” in eternity which inspires Milton to reincarnate himself, and the subject of that song, the contest of Palamabron and Satan, is an expansion of an episode in Blake’s own life, his sojourn at Felpham with Hayley. From here on the misunderstandings come thick and fast, and we must walk warily. If we know anything of Blake’s biography, we can see that the Bard’s Song can be partly interpreted from it: Palamabron is Blake, Satan Hayley, Blake’s wife Elynittria, the emanation of Palamabron, and probably one or two of Hayley’s relatives or associates are included in the symbolism. It is not necessary to know much of this in order to understand the poem, and by the time we reach the end we are forced to conclude that the Satan of the twenty-seven Heavens and the forty-eight deformed Human Wonders of the Almighty has got rather beyond the eighteenth century author of *The Triumphs of Temper.* It is interesting and valuable to know about Hayley, just as it is interesting and valuable to know in reading *Samson Agonistes* that Milton, like his hero, was blind and a prisoner of Philistines. But the link between Samson and Milton does not mean that *Samson Agonistes* is an autobiographical poem: it simply means that Milton was the only man who could have written it. Similarly in interpreting Blake’s poem a critic should concern himself, not with what a biographer would make out of Blake’s relations with Hayley, but with what Blake’s imagination made out of them. The latter will be something with which the “real” Hayley has very little, and nothing relevant, to do.

The readiness of even sympathetic readers to confuse a poet’s life and his imagination seems to be based on the assumption that the life is real and the poetry a by-product, so that to search for biography in poetry is, from this point of view, searching for the reality under a disguise. The result, in the criticism of English literature, is that the process of interpreting an unchangeable and deliberately created body of poetry has come to be regarded as fanciful, and the process of reconstructing a vanished life out of a chaos of documents, legends, allusions, gossip and guesswork a matter of exact research. But this is an inversion of the poet’s own attitude to his life. The linear sequence of events is imaginative material, just as the data of sense experience are, and are there to be cast into the forming crucible of the mind. In the resulting novel or drama we may, if we know the poet personally, recognize things that remind us of past events in his life, but to read the work of art as something to be interpreted by past events is the most arrant Philistinism. To dissolve art back into the artist’s experience is like scraping the paint off a canvas in order to see what the “real” canvas looked like before it assumed its painted disguise. A satirist, let us say, goes to visit a friend, and out of some possibly quite irrelevant incident his mind, which is looking for subjects of satire all the time it is awake, evolves a vision of a miser or a parvenu. In his next satire the miser or parvenu will recall his former host to his friends, including the host himself. They will be outraged that he has violated his friend’s hospitality; he will be outraged by their ignorance of how an artist’s mind works. He will maintain, in short, that “Imagination has nothing to do with Memory,”<sup>[9](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn009)</sup> just as it has nothing to do with sense experience, even when memory and sense experience provide suggestions for the material.

Of course there are writers who use experience not only as material but as form, who pay off scores and draw systematically from the flayed model. There are also border-line cases where it is impossible wholly to separate art and biography, and Blake’s *Milton* is one of them. But we should hardly expect to find that in writing *Milton* Blake turned his back on his whole theory of inspiration, which refuses all importance to any part of a writer’s personality except his creative imagination. We shall not get far with *Milton*, in other words, by reading it as a grotesquely overwritten account of a squabble between a sulky megalomaniac and a conceited dilettante. It is true that some years later Blake says: “The manner in which I have routed out the nest of villains will be seen in a Poem concerning my Three years’ Herculean Labours at Felpham, which I will soon Publish.”<sup>[10](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn010)</sup> But he says this after darker shadows had passed across his life, when he was beginning to see his connection with Hayley as part of an organized conspiracy to swindle him, spread the story that he was mad, and exclude his pictures from the Academy. Whatever this passage may refer to, it does not accurately refer to the *Milton* we have, the whole point of which is that Hayley is not a villain and that imaginative enmity and personal friendship can coexist between two men. As a personal revenge on Hayley, *Milton* would have been the most futile revenge ever taken. Besides, Blake had a gift for invective, and could have used much plainer language than the elaborate symbolism he adopts in *Milton* if he had wanted the public to join him in attacking Hayley. We have not yet touched on the real reason for the appearance of Hayley in *Milton:* our present purpose is to insist that the two great illuminations portrayed in that poem do not describe events in Blake’s life, but form a visionary drama. Those who have crucial illuminations in their lives and record them in autobiography are mostly converts who up to their conversion have been largely unaware of the mental processes going on within them. Blake being an artist who dealt professionally in illumination, we must see in his poem the vision of the eternal present which he gives us, and avoid confusing it with a remembrance of things past. The importance of this will become clearer as we go on.

The significance of Hayley in his own time has become somewhat blurred by his lack of it in ours; yet if one were looking for a representative of Augustan culture who would bring out the whole antagonism between Blake and that culture, one could hardly do better. Even Blake would not have denied that the really great Augustans, Pope and Johnson for instance, had the heat of imaginative energy in them, and fools are of no importance in any age. But Hayley was neither fool nor genius: he was a man of fashionable taste and social intelligence, a patron of the arts and as such a medium between real genius and society. That Blake had genius was clear, and it was the patron’s task, as Hayley conceived it, to direct genius into socially acceptable channels. Now as “society” is apt to be conservative and its members something less than brilliant, the artist must, if he is to succeed, hold his genius down to the point at which mediocrities can understand it and conservatives approve of it. The trouble with Blake, thought Hayley, is that he is rather overburdened with genius, and takes himself too seriously; but geniuses, like children, must be tactfully led to understand the world they have to live in. The problem of the poet’s relation to society, therefore, should be left to the Hayleys and not to the Blakes to solve.

In a few months Hayley had turned from Providence into a grinning spectre of polite but persistent discouragement which it was impossible to banish. Behind Hayley was the solid body of organized taste he stood for, including many patrons who would, on Hayley’s recommendation, give Blake the occasional order for a handscreen. Blake was alone, his wife was ill, he was dependent on Hayley, and all the moral virtue in his character: self-respect, his duty as a husband and provider, his gratitude to his patron, and even, one may say, and Hayley doubtless did say, his duty to his own genius to make it known to the public, all conspired to aid Hayley and postpone his epic. So he tried to fulfill his commissions and learn to be a miniature painter. There were some things harder to learn than that: for instance, the fact that his position toward Hayley’s society was that of a flunkey: that he was accepted as a gentleman only because none of them wanted to put him in a livery and pay him a regular salary. As Blake could never have grasped this delicate point, it is not incredible if one of the patrons had to bribe Hayley to keep Blake out of her sight.<sup>[11](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn011)</sup>

Caught in this “silken net” of gratitude, money, friendship and reasonable arguments, Blake had his “Palamabron” mood in which he saw that Hayley was his friend and patron, and a very forbearing and decent one at that, that he was genuinely anxious for Blake’s welfare, that he could not help his lack of sympathy for Blake, and that he could not be told to mind his own business because in a sense Blake was his business. At times, too, he was stung into a “Rintrah” mood of fury in which he saw Hayley as a pompous bore and a conceited ass whose only interest in him was to make him over in his own likeness. A muddled man would have finally decided that one of these and not the other was the “real” or “essential” Hayley, but Blake’s conception of reality was more complex than that. And if he was thinking of a poem on Milton, he would learn from Hayley that the apostolic succession had gone elsewhere. For it appeared that one Klopstock, a German poet who greatly admired Milton, had written a long apocalyptic poem called *The Messiah*, and that Hayley was returning the compliment to English literature by translating Klopstock into English. However, this only confirmed Blake in his resolve to write on Milton, or suggested it if he had not already made it. Blake decided that Klopstock had defied England to produce the successor to Milton, and that it was up to him to meet the challenge. His brilliant fantasy on Klopstock leaves no doubt that he considered him a kind of poetical Chadband; unfairly, but in the circumstances not inexcusably.<sup>[12](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn012)</sup>

Finally, even Hayley lost his usually triumphant temper, and, no doubt, said the things that an ordinary man does say when exasperated by a great man who is his social inferior. This broke down the deadlock at once. Even if there were mutual apologies and an agreement to forget everything afterwards, Blake had seen, for a few moments, something looking at him out of Hayley’s eyes that was not anxiety for his welfare. It was hatred; a half-spiteful, half-horrified mixture of resentment and fear; the response of society to the prophet. After that, Blake knew that neither friendship nor gratitude could ever again tempt him to abandon his genius.

In August 1803 Blake threw a drunken soldier named Schofield (the spelling varies) out of his garden at Felpham, and Schofield went off to take advantage of a wartime hysteria and try to pin a charge of high treason on Blake. Blake was by no means a timid man, but even so the worry hung over him for months, and made all concentrated work impossible. No doubt he did not seriously expect moral virtue to order him hanged, but after all he was on trial with that a possible result of conviction, and Schofield was ready to perjure himself to bring it about. But there was something very curious about the whole business. Why had Schofield come into his garden and made himself offensive? Blake saw evidence that Schofield had “come into the Garden with some bad intention, or at least with a prejudiced Mind.”<sup>[13](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn013)</sup> If so, who had sent him? Could Hayley really have been so desperate at his failure to influence Blake in his own direction that he finally, as Blake wrote, “Hired a villain to bereave my life”?<sup>[14](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn014)</sup> It sounds far fetched enough; but Hayley had patronized Cowper, and Cowper had gone mad.<sup>[15](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn015)</sup> He had patronized Blake, and a good many people were saying that Blake was mad. Was it possible, then, that Hayley, having failed either to convert Blake or break his mind, was offering him up as a sacrifice to moral virtue, the sacrifice mimicked by the peasants who carry a figure called “Death” out of their cornfields to free them of bad luck? Blake remembered how:

Felpham Billy rode out every morn

Horseback with Death over the fields of corn,

Who with iron hand cuff’d in the afternoon

The Ears of Billy’s Lawyer & Dragoon.<sup>[16](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn016)</sup>

Here “Death” and “Billy’s Dragoon” are clearly Blake and Schofield respectively. This does not mean that Hayley would actually have seen Blake hanged, but he may have felt that a great enough pressure of temporal worries would bring Blake’s genius down to a more “normal” outlook. It might also, of course, destroy it altogether, but if Hayley had been responsible for anything in the tragedy of Cowper he was evidently a persistent experimenter. All this, once more, is Blake’s creative instinct evolving a dramatic poem out of the situation, and not necessarily Blake’s actual state of mind at any given time. When one has a threatening rupture with one and perhaps several more friends, a sick and terrified wife, and a trial for high treason on one’s hands; when one is lonely and unable to work through worry; when one has no friends directly acquainted with the situation; and when all this follows close on the heels of the most exultant illumination of mind which produces an intense longing to work, one may not always be sure just what one’s state of mind is.

And although Hayley appeared at Blake’s trial and gave evidence that helped a great deal, was even perhaps decisive, in acquitting him, Blake still had a poetic theme of some effectiveness. It was rather melodramatic and badly motivated; it was too open to self-pity, and Blake was not fond of martyrdom as a poetic theme. But there is a more important objection to it. Such a theme would make Hayley Blake’s enemy, and Blake could make no poetic use of Hayley unless Hayley were his personal friend; unless, as he says, “Corporeal Friends are Spiritual Enemies.”<sup>[17](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn017)</sup> The real enemy is the spirit that looked out of Hayley’s eyes when Hayley was angry. That is Hayley’s Selfhood or Spectre, the Satan in him that hates and tries to destroy all the imagination it finds. It is a weakling’s charity to say that we must love our friends in spite of or including their faults: their faults are their diseases, and to love a man’s disease is not very friendly to the man. All men are composed of imagination and Selfhood, and all men should cherish the former in themselves and love it in other men, while hating all Selfhoods and trying to annihilate their own. So, while Blake portrayed Hayley’s Selfhood as Satan, he wrote friendly letters to its mixture with Hayley’s imagination, and did his best to encourage the latter, even to the point of praising Hayley’s poems and attempting to illustrate them. But his pencil was shrewder than he, and Blake and Hayley gradually gave each other up. One of Blake’s hostile critics, unable to say that the *Songs of Innocence* are bad poems, has wistfully quoted from Hayley’s “Little Tom the Sailor” in order to show how bad they would have been if, as he says, Blake had not been supremely gifted as a lyrical poet. Absurd as this is, the equation Blake minus Blake’s genius equals Hayley is only a step removed from the real meaning of *Milton.*

When Milton reincarnates himself in Blake and Blake’s imagination is purified, Satan is cast out of both of them at once and revealed for what he is. He is a lot of things, but fundamentally moral virtue, the alternative “good” of passive conformity which the world offers the imagination. No one is likely to be tempted by a devil with visible horns and tail, but a decent, respectable friend like Hayley can sing a very siren song to a neglected poet. The “Badman” portrayed by Bunyan as an incarnation of Satan in this world is certainly not an attractive man, but neither is he an untypical product of Restoration society. If bad men could not get along in this world Satan would not be the prince of it. Blake, clarifying this point still further, sees that evil is dangerous in proportion as it is protected and concealed by society. Hypocrisy is more dangerous than crime; self-deception is more dangerous than hypocrisy. The reason why society pays so little attention to its wise men is not that society consists of criminals or hypocrites, but that it consists of “normal” people who sincerely believe in the superiority of common to uncommon sense.

The comparatively trivial nature of the quarrel between Blake and Hayley makes it all the more crucial. Faced with open persecution, one may obediently strike the heroic pose that persecution may inspire even in the indifferent. But it is not in the grandiose but in the petty events of life, where the issues involved seem of too trifling importance to be worth making principles of, that tyranny and the repression of genius achieve their really significant triumphs. The fear of being thought a prig will do far more to weaken the prophet than the fear of social hatred. Again, to the ordinary man, developing the imagination means bringing out the divinity in himself which all men have. To the artist it also means bringing out the genius in himself which most men have not. An ordinary event in an artist’s life in which these two aspects of the imagination coincide puts the artist in alignment with his public, providing a common ground of sympathy between the imagination with genius and the imagination without it.

• 4 •

THE chief difficulty in understanding the “Bard’s Song” is that it does not relate a sequence of events, but tells the story of the dispute of Palamabron and Satan and then brings out its larger significance by a series of lifting backdrops. The Biblical symbolism implied rather than expressed in it is worth spending a moment on, as it is of great importance in *Jerusalem.* We all know, the Bard assumes, that Albion was a fourfold Man who in his fall became a strong man, a beautiful man and an ugly man. By a principle which is also important in *Jerusalem*, the events of the Fall are reproduced in civilized life, and the leaders of men may therefore be divided into the strong, the beautiful and the ugly. We shall have to give these three classes the names, not of the Zoas, but of the sons of Los, Los being the genius of civilized life. Let us call them, therefore, Rintrah, Palamabron and Satan, Satan being the youngest born son of Los, that is, the consolidation of error which Los develops out of Urizen.<sup>[18](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn018)</sup>

Rintrah is, as we know, the hermit-prophet in the desert who calls upon an evil world to repent. He is Blake’s Elijah who, as Blake says, “comprehends all the Prophetic Characters,”<sup>[19](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn019)</sup> and who in the Gospels is identified with John the Baptist. Blake speaks in the name of Rintrah when he inscribes on the “There is No Natural Religion” plates the prophetic motto, “The Voice of one crying in the Wilderness,” and again in the prelude to *The Marriage of Heaven and Hell.* The voice of Rintrah is heard again in any outcast or rebel prophet, an example in Blake’s day being Byron, whom Blake addresses as Elijah in the exordium to *The Ghost of Abel.* The Rintrah or strong class of men is thus a “Reprobate” class: its members are always looked upon as dangerous nuisances. They accept none of the conventional values of society and are revolutionaries, iconoclasts and blasphemers of Nobodaddy. Satan, on the other hand, is the prince of this world: he is the spirit of inertia which incarnates itself in compromise. The worshipers of Satan accept established religions, philosophies and social conditions because they are established; they observe all the commandments of the law from their youth upwards, and their days are long and peaceful in the lands they possess. They, therefore, are “The Elect from before the foundation of the World,” and their worldly prosperity is a sign of their inward grace.

Between these two stand most honest men, including Blake himself, who are represented by Palamabron. Few artists can become hermits and denounce society from the outside: most of them must work within it, come to terms with it, and improve its culture without any desire either to accept or to quarrel with its anomalies. Such an artist thus spends his life between two opposed duties, both of which may be called “good.” There is his duty to his imagination, the necessity within him to say what he must say. There is also his duty not to destroy the effectiveness of his work by prematurely exasperating society; there is his love for his wife, family and friends; there is a need for serenity and quiet. Of course society is always trying to turn everything under its control, especially the artist’s family, into traps to cripple his genius; but nevertheless it remains true that, as we said earlier, there is much that is really good in moral good, when attached to the imagination and not made an end in itself. The moral law is the subconscious foundation of the imaginative life, as physical law is the subconscious foundation of the conscious vision. The artist who lives and dies in society without surrendering his imaginative honesty is of the class Blake calls “Redeemed.”

As Rintrah is Elijah or the spirit of prophecy, so Palamabron is Moses or the spirit, as opposed to the letter, of the law. Associated with Aaron, Moses is an evil being, a spokesman of the morally virtuous Satan who wrote the ten commandments. But there is much that is good in moral good, and when Jesus came he enabled his followers to release real from moral virtue and attach the former to their imaginations. That is why Jesus appears on the Mount of Transfiguration accompanied by Moses as well as Elijah, and why he said in what seems a paradox that nothing would pass away from a law which he came to supersede. The redemption of Moses, the emancipation of morality from routine obedience to the inward discipline of wisdom, is the Biblical archetype of the saving of the artist from the bondage of the law.

In the eleventh chapter of Revelation we are told of the martyrdom of two “witnesses,” who are evidently Moses and Elijah again,<sup>[20](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn020)</sup> by Satan. Their dead bodies “lie in the street of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified”<sup>[21](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn021)</sup>—in other words the *civitas terrena* of the historical cycle. In the next chapter we are told of Satan’s attack on a “woman clothed with the sun” which is temporarily thwarted by the archangel Michael, in Daniel the champion of the spiritual Israel. The woman is a part of Jerusalem, the city of the sun and the Bride of Man, and the fact that the Satan who attacks her is a dragon whose tail “drew the third part of the stars of heaven” refers to the Satanic origin of the present “Mundane Shell.” Now just as Jerusalem is visualized both as a city and as a bride, depending on whether the vision is of Eden or Beulah, so the *civitas terrena*, Sodom, Egypt, the fallen Jerusalem, may also be visualized as a harlot who is Satan’s mistress. This harlot of course is Rahab, who appears in the seventeenth chapter with the further associations of Babylon and Rome.

The Bard’s Song tells how Satan, who is ugly only when recognized for what he is, and who before that is a gentle, persuasive and attractive spirit, asked Los if he could do Palamabron’s work for Palamabron’s own good. The work is represented by the curious symbol of plowing the mundane shell, which helps the embryos within it to sprout upwards into eternity: we have met it before in the ninth Night of *The Four Zoas.* The plowman is traditional in the English epic as a symbol of the visionary: there is Langland’s Piers who is identified with Christ, the idealized plowman of Chaucer, and Spenser’s St. George, whose name indicates his agricultural origin.<sup>[22](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn022)</sup> Los agreed, and disaster resulted, a disaster corresponding in the archetypal vision to Luvah’s seizure of the sun. Even so, it was difficult to see what was wrong because Satan was convinced that he was right and that any disaster had been the result of Palamabron’s resentment at being displaced. There was a deadlock here which lasted until Satan went over to Palamabron’s ally Rintrah; in other words, lost his temper. That cleared the air, in the way we have explained, and Palamabron was thus “redeemed” by the anger of the “reprobate” Rintrah, even though it was found on the other side. The account in Revelation speaks of a conflict between Satan and Michael, which implies an association between Michael and Rintrah, though the characters are distinguished by Blake (and perhaps a corresponding one, not mentioned, between Palamabron and the “affable archangel” Raphael). The connecting link is the reference in the Epistle of Jude to Michael’s dispute with Satan over the body of Moses (Palamabron).<sup>[23](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn023)</sup> We shall meet this dispute again in *Jerusalem.*

Once the Satanic nature of Satan has been thoroughly understood, a backdrop rolls up and we see the original Satan who is the prince of the starry universe, whereupon a second backdrop is raised and we see a woman, Satan’s harlot mistress, who this time is neither Rahab nor Tirzah but a still more inclusive character called Leutha, a kind of Lilith who is said to have begotten the whole race of demons who make up Antichrist. She is thus a combination of Tirzah, Vala and Rahab, and represents the unified symbol of objective nature corresponding to the Luvah of *Jerusalem* who represents the whole process of fallen life. Like Luvah, she is a fertility spirit in the minor poems. Blake leaves her undeveloped, and goes back to Vala for *Jerusalem*, but here she is the original “female will” of the Fall, and after she appears, history begins and proceeds onward to its climax, the coming of the Saviour of Man whom all society agreed to be a reprobate, blasphemer and transgressor.

The Bard’s Song shocks many of those who hear it because it associates a great deal of the kindly and decent behavior of moral people with guilt. Milton, who also hears it, is not shocked, but he is deeply impressed. There was much in his own masterpiece that had grown out of political disillusionment—after the English revolution had gone its complete circuit from Charles the First to Charles the Second he was forced to see that there was no poetic justice in experience. Like the author of Job, he was then forced to consider the problem of why the innocent suffer. The only possible answer is that there is no such thing as innocence; we are all equally caught in the trap of a fallen world. Milton gave this answer as Job had given it before him, and he had given it in terms of the Orc cycle which the degeneration of his Satan illustrates. *Paradise Lost* tells us that the whole world since the Fall is in the remorseless grip of this cycle and can be redeemed from it only by Jesus; that it is the business of the visionary to proclaim the Word of God to a society under the domination of Satan; and that the visionary’s social position is typically that of an isolated voice crying in the wilderness against the injustice and hypocrisy of the society from which he has sprung.

All this Milton had seen: what he had not seen was the Behemoth and Leviathan that stood at the end of his vision as they stood at the end of Job’s. The fallen Adam lives in a fallen world. In *Paradise Lost* that world is substantially the same world as the one Jesus creates in Book VII; but if Satan is now the prince of it he must have produced a radical change in its nature. It is wrong, therefore, to associate Satan solely with chaos and moral evil: what we call creation is a part of chaos; moral good is part of moral evil, and creation and moral good both belong to Satan. Blake had already asserted that “in the Book of Job, Milton’s Messiah is call’d Satan.”<sup>[24](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn024)</sup> Milton, therefore, wants to re-enter the world and gain a new vision. This vision will do two things for him: it will enable him to see the physical world as Satanic rather than divine, and it will enable him as a result to see his “emanation,” or totality of the things he loves, as part of himself and not as a remote and objective “female will.” The former is the climax of the first book of *Milton;* the latter is the climax of the second. (Milton’s emanation,  Ololon, is “sixfold,” there being six women in Milton’s family, and so can be viewed from her seamy side as Rahab and the five daughters who are the five fallen senses, and of whom Tirzah is the chief.) The two books also give us the obverse and reverse of the same instant of illumination. The first book is an apocalyptic restatement of the vision which Michael shows Adam at the end of *Paradise Lost*, and in it the entire time and space of the fallen world is seen, not as emerging from the loins and senses of fallen Man, but as reintegrated with him. The second part shows us the counterpart of this, the rejection of the mirage which is implied by the acceptance of reality. It is essentially the vision of *Paradise Regained*, in which Satan offers Christ so many of the “good” things of a fallen world that it eventually dawns on us that the world and the devil are the same thing, and that thing an illusion.

• 5 •

MILTON’S journey to the fallen world, or part of it, repeats the journey of Moses through the wilderness to the boundaries of the Promised Land, and, like Moses, he fails to cross the Jordan and enter Canaan, though all the forces of evil coax him to do so. We shall explain what this means later. Moses, Palamabron, Milton and Blake (and as far as possible Hayley) all belong to the “Redeemed” class which has to be separated from the Satanic element within it. As such, Milton is what may loosely be called a Puritan: he is a mixture of Christian vision with the sterility of moral virtue and rationalism. Those who see him descend, the four Zoas, the “nameless shadowy female,” Rahab and Tirzah, even Rintrah and Palamabron, all see in him the Moses of the Exodus, the lawgiver of a hidden thundergod of mystery and cruelty, and look on him with terror or delight, according to their natures. Only Los sees the significance of the return. We said in commenting on *Visions of the Daughters of Albion* that Puritanism was the ancestor of Deism in the sense that everything wrong with Puritanism, its vestigial natural religion, its Pharisaic morality, its scholastic rationalism and its belief in the infallible goodness of the conventionally orthodox, had in the following century been precipitated as Deism. Los sees that Milton must be on his way to reinforce, not the Deists, but the visionaries who have inherited the other half of Puritanism, its belief in the civilizing Word of God; that Deism is a consolidation of error, and that Milton’s return is consequently a sign that “the time is at hand,” as the New Testament says. So Los allows Milton to pass into the world, Milton enters Blake’s “left foot,” Blake, in one of those tremendous metaphors which are a main reward of reading him, stoops down and binds the material world as a sandal on that foot, and unites with Los, the spiritual form of time. This union completes the recreation of Milton’s vision.

Milton knew from his Cambridge days at least that he was someday to write a great epic of the eternal world, and hence for many years he was under the contradictory impulses of accomplishing his divine mission and of postponing it until he was fully capable of it. Some of his irascibility during that period may be accounted for by the mental strain arising from this paradox of frustration. Certainly his choice of epic themes reflects it. Adam and Christ are both tempted to premature imaginative acts, acts which are not so much wrong in themselves as attempts to force God’s hand before the lapse of time which his will has decreed. The sin Adam commits and Christ resists was thus a sin against Los, the Holy Spirit of Time which, as Blake complains, remains a “vacuum” in Milton. In Milton’s personal case we must distinguish between the necessity of waiting for his epic to ripen and the temptation to postpone it indefinitely. The latter, which was evil but appeared to him under the guise of patriotic duty, corresponds to the temptation of Blake by Hayley to postpone his epic in favor of more practicable ways of supporting a wife.

This distinction, applied to *Paradise Lost*, affords an interesting criticism of it. Granted for the moment that the punishment of Adam and all his progeny for an act which God knew he would commit is defensible, and redounds in some way to God’s credit. Granted even that it is possible to work out a coherent scheme of creation and fall with a prehuman and yet moral God. Even so, the climax of the whole poem, the vista of human life stretching from the creation to the apocalypse which Michael shows Adam, fails to make the very point that justifies it artistically. The descendants of Adam, apparently, suffer for a length of time arbitrarily set by God and terminated by him at his pleasure for inscrutable reasons. But inscrutable reasons will not satisfy an adult inquirer. The poem would come to a far richer and more suggestive conclusion if some shape in time could be portrayed, a process which goes on in time but can last only a certain length of time, producing first Jesus and then the apocalypse as its simmer and boil, so to speak, so that history itself becomes the gradual recovery of Paradise by God awakening in Man. Jesus himself suggests such a process when he speaks of the Holy Spirit as continuing his work until the last day. If Milton had done this, the Holy Spirit, who is Los or the imaginative form of time, would not have remained a vacuum in his poem. Thus the integration of Milton and Blake with Los results in a complete vision of the shape of time, in which time and history are seen as a single human form, “the world of Los, the labour of six thousand years.”<sup>[25](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn025)</sup> The failure of England to rouse itself from sleep in Milton’s life may, by weakening his sense of historical crisis, have caused the omission of the form of time from his epic; and the failure in its turn indicated that Los’s labor was not yet completed. But a later poet may say:

if Bacon, Newton, Locke

Deny a Conscience in Man & the Communion of Saints & Angels,

Contemning the Divine Vision & Fruition, Worshiping the Deus

Of the Heathen, The God of This World, & the Goddess Nature,

Mystery, Babylon the Great, The Druid Dragon & hidden Harlot,

Is it not that Signal of the Morning which was told us in the Beginning?<sup>[26](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn026)</sup>

When Milton returns to the world, he finds that European civilization is on the point of subsiding into a phase of metropolitan imperialism which will make the pomp of Britain and France one with Nineveh and Tyre. That is the wheel of the Orc cycle. On the other hand, “The whole extent of the Globe is explored,” and sharp limits are being set to further centrifugal expansion. What Milton sees first of all is war, and a promise of more and bigger wars. But he also sees that there is, for the first time in history, the possibility that the entire human race will consolidate into a unit, that out of warfare and trade rivalries some kind of international law and commerce will eventually be born. If this happens, it means that Man is subconsciously developing a circulatory and digestive system analogous to that which goes on in ourselves. This constitutes the lower part of the palace of art, Allamanda and Bowlahoola, the heart and stomach of the individual, and the commerce, science and law of Man. Once the heart and stomach of a larger human body appear, a larger human brain will soon follow them, and the Golden Age of Atlantis, when “all had originally one language, and one religion,” will be restored. The religion will be the religion of Jesus, the Everlasting Gospel, and the language will be the tongue of Albion. Blake does not mean by one religion the acceptance of a uniform set of doctrines by all men: he means the attainment of civilized liberty and the common vision of the divinity and unity of Man which is life in Jesus. By one language he does not mean English: he means, quoting the Bible and repeating Milton in *Areopagitica*, that all the Lord’s people will become prophets: all will speak the language of the imagination, and the perception of the sun as a company of angels will be the rule rather than the exception. Further, he does not say that all were originally of one race or kingdom or empire, and though he symbolizes humanity by the name of his own nation, his “Albion” has nothing to do with the frantic jingoism which a confused idea of the same symbolism might easily develop, and has developed in our day.

A larger human brain will be developed by Man when the whole of human life is seen and understood as a single mental form. This single mental form is a drama of creation, struggle, redemption and restoration in the fallen life of a divine Man. This drama is the archetype of all prophecy and art, the universal form which art reveals in pieces, and it is also the Word of God, the end of the journey of our intellectual powers. And here the antithesis between imagination and memory, the intellectual powers and the corporeal understanding, the vision of life and the vision of death, reaches its crisis. Everything that has ever happened since the beginning of time is part, Blake says, of the literal Word of God.<sup>[27](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn027)</sup> The ordinary historical conception of human existence as a dissolving flux in linear time is therefore the literal approach to life, the corporeal understanding based on memory. History as the total form of all genuine efforts of human culture and civilization is the canon or Scripture of human life. History as linear time is the great apocrypha or mystery which has to be rejected from it.

The primary social function of the epic is to teach the “nation” its own traditions, and in Blakean terms this means recreating dead facts into living truths, the vanished spectres of tradition into the imagination’s eternal and infinite present. One of the many reasons why the Bible has a unique claim on our cultural interest is that the Bible shows the evolution of history as past time into history as present vision not only as an accomplished fact but as a process. There is a good deal of what passes for history in the Old Testament, but the more we try to read it as history the more puzzled we get. As history, it is not only often dreary and absurd in itself, but its subject, the annals of an obscure race in a remote land, hardly seems to have the direct connection with our own imaginative needs which the Bible’s reputation may lead us to expect. As history, its truth is of little value, and to believe that the accounts of Abraham’s dealings with his wives are historically true does not make them less tedious and puerile. And as we read further, we begin to suspect that the motive of all this history is to force the pious Hebrew to accept the crucial importance of the deliverance of his ancestors from Egypt in order that he may unquestioningly follow, in its least details, the ceremonial law which was the final form of that alleged deliverance. Tyranny is hereditary in structure, and is rationalized as the necessary result of a chain of causality in time stretching back to some original contract or covenant which we are powerless to alter and are bound to observe. This is the priestly reason for preserving traditions, and this union of history and law is the “old testament,” the clasping of dead hands over a legal contract in a vanished past.

The prophets fought against this moral bondage and Jesus delivered us from it. But the prophets did not turn their backs on their national history: they recreated it, and brought out of it the eternally present archetypes of the fall and redemption of man. Jesus therefore, in completing their work, did not destroy the law, but fulfilled it: he transfigured it by demonstrating its true meaning. The freedom of the Gospel brings with it the freedom to read the Old Testament mentally instead of corporeally, as the allegorical poem of a great civilization, not as the collected legal and historical superstitions of petty barbarians. When Paul reads the stories of Abraham and his wives, they suggest to him the allegory of the two cities which develops out of him into the gigantic Christian vision of St. Augustine’s great book and of Blake’s Prophecies:

For it is written, that Abraham had two sons, the one by a bondmaid, the other by a freewoman. But he who was of the bondwoman was born after the flesh; but he of the freewoman was by promise. Which things are an allegory: for these are the two covenants; the one from the mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage, which is Agar. For this Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and answereth to Jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage with her children. But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us all.<sup>[28](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn028)</sup>

What is true of the history is equally true of the law, which has always been read allegorically by the Christian. The Gospel teaches us not to despise the letter of the law, but to read it as “letters,” spiritually, with the full energy of an active and intelligent mind. The law tells us to offer our first fruits to God. The corporeal understanding interprets that as a command to waste our best efforts in an attempt to bribe a ravenously greedy demon of the sky. The least touch of the imagination releases us from the act, and gives us the anthropologist’s insight into its meaning. The full imagination transforms the offering of first fruits into one of the archetypes of the human mind: the identification of the created thing with the God who made it. The Bible teaches us to read like this: it is the primer of a cultured and civilized man. It teaches us to see the sun not as a polished guinea but as a company of angels, and it teaches us to see in the records of all past time not a chaos of tyrannies, but the eternal and eventually emerging form of human life, a form which is the larger body of Man and of God. In Blake’s symbolism this is the redemption of the moral virtue of Palamabron, or Moses, by the prophetic power of Rintrah, or Elijah, both of whom attend a divine Man in his transfiguration.

But—and here Blake breaks away from most of those who would agree with him thus far—the same contrast of law and gospel reappears in Christianity itself. If the Old Testament is transformed from the puerile to the profound by being read imaginatively, we can hardly plunge back into literalism when we turn to the Gospel. The belief, with its implications, that Jesus existed on earth two thousand years ago, which is the literal or historical core of the New Testament, is, whether in itself true or false, not the basis of the Christian religion. On this level the essence of Christianity is the compulsory acceptance of a vanished event, and if we pull the words “compulsory” and “vanished” out of that clause we may see that tyranny and mystery, the two marks of the Beast, are still involved in such an acceptance of Christianity. It may be objected that, while *Julius Caesar* and *King Lear* are equally products of Shakespeare’s imagination, there is a considerable difference between the evidence we have for Caesar’s existence and the evidence we have for Lear’s, and that the distinction is something we should take into account in reading the New Testament. But it is that very distinction between what must have been true and what may not have been true that is the real trap for the imagination, and the New Testament goes out of its way to prevent us from walking into it. That is why we have four Gospels with different and often quite inconsistent accounts of Jesus’ life, and why the historical proofs for that life are hermetically sealed within the Bible itself. No Evangelist has the slightest interest in writing a biography of Jesus. The Jesus about whom a biography can be written is dead and gone, and survives only as Antichrist. The Evangelists tell us not how Christ came, but how he comes: they are concerned not with a vanished past but with the imagination’s “Eternal Now.” The timid will protest that we are here in danger of dissolving the reality of Christianity into a vaporous allegory: Blake’s answer is that the core of reality is mental and present, not physical and past. Past events do not necessarily dissolve in time, but their existence in the eternal present depends on imaginative recreation.

Each of the seven Orc cycles or “Eyes” of history bears a divine name representing the conception of God which it has. The “Eye” of Jehovah is the Hebrew religious imagination. In Blake’s *Vision of the Book of Job* Jehovah and Job have the same face because Jehovah is inside Job’s mind. But each cycle shows the same antithesis between the imaginative and the legal and historical conceptions of its God. The aggregate of the former is the real Word of God; the aggregate of the latter takes the form of the twenty-seven “Churches” into which these Eyes, or at least the last five of them, are divided. The crisis in Milton’s vision comes when he sees Satan as this aggregate of Churches, and, by casting him off, shows that he identifies the conception of the church with history and the law. For the natural man will always try to reach eternity through a historical tradition and a legal contract, whether he associates them with Moses or with Jesus. And the Christian Church is, as much as the Jewish Church, a historical continuum stretching back to an alleged provision made by Jesus for the observance of a ceremonial and moral code based on the memory of his past appearance in time. Milton’s predecessor Luther understood something of this: he understood too that it was spiritually dangerous to be illiterate, and that the essence of Christianity is the direct individual recreation of the Word of God. But as he tried to replace the twenty-sixth church with a twenty-seventh, he is now himself a part of what he condemned.

The temptation of the churches could refer either to joining or reforming an old church, or to founding a new one. The latter aspect of it brings up a curious relationship between Blake and a number of new religions, which may have struck the reader already. (By this time in the poem Blake and Milton are the same person, and Milton’s temptation is also Blake’s.) If Blake had told us that he had gone to visit the wise men of the East and had learned from them the doctrines which he has set down in his poems, we should know what he meant, or ought to by now. When Madame Blavatsky tells us the same thing we are not sure what she means. If Blake had told us that he had copied a vision of an ancient Atlantic Continent from golden plates given him by an angel we should know what he meant. When Joseph Smith tells us the same thing about the Mormon Bible we are not sure what he means. When Blake tells us that the English are a lost portion of a spiritual Israel or that pain and sin are an illusion, we can accept what he says without question. When Anglo-Israelites and Christian Scientists expound what sound so much like the same doctrines, unquestioning acceptance of what they say would commit us to a great deal more. All these churches start, from Blake’s point of view, with a kernel of genuine vision, otherwise they would attract no adherents at all, but sooner or later a ceremonial literalism, or an acid test of compulsory belief in vanished events, appear in them as in every church. All such religions are exclusive, in the sense that however devoted one might be to any one of them, it would take a very impressionable person to believe in them all. But the reader of Blake can see the real or imaginative form of each one of them, and disregard their nonpoetic husks.

If Milton or Blake had joined or founded a church, therefore, they would have lost the real Church, the total vision which is the city of God, and gained a sect. No visible church will ever identify itself with civilized art, purge itself of all legal and historical conceptions of truth, and attain the absolute clarity of present vision. In the long run all churches are more interested in the rational than the creative aspect of the mind, in excluding from the truth of what they say the falsehood of what everyone else says instead of including its truth, in binding together in a ceremonial and moral unity a chosen people of spiritual Jews. The source of their revelation has no such interest. Job is a dramatic poem, the Song of Songs a love-poem, the Apocalypse an allegory, the teachings of Jesus mainly parables, and all the prophecy and doctrine is continuously visualized and illustrated. Only the poetic imagination can comprehend the Bible, and the Bible introduces that imagination to a mental world of inspired wisdom, culture and beauty in which all religions are one.

This visionary tolerance is the opposite of the rational tolerance which holds that all religions are equally attempts to solve an insoluble mystery. This is Deism: the trumpet which gives out such uncertain sounds can hardly prepare anyone for “Mental Fight,” and will soon dwindle into the sheep-bell tinkle of moral virtue. The place of honor in art goes to the artist who has passed through religion and come out on the other side. Such an artist, in Blake’s symbolism, has gone with the church to the upper limit of Beulah, where it visualizes itself as the Bride of Christ and man as a creature of God, and has then burst through the ring of fire into the Eden where man is no longer a creature but a creator and is one with God. There he is a citizen of the free city which all human life strives to realize in this world, and which is the Word of God or body of Jesus; and whenever he speaks to other men in the language of the creating mind he recreates that Word in time. Anything short of this will drive him back from the ring of purging visionary fire into the mundane shell, the world of nature and reason, where all religions attempt to include the natural religion which is an “Impossible Absurdity.”<sup>[29](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn029)</sup>

The closing words of the above two paragraphs are intended to suggest that the titles of the sets of aphorisms which introduce Blake’s canon, “There is No Natural Religion” and “All Religions are One,” contain the whole of his thought if they are understood simultaneously. Any sectarian bigot could assent to the former alone, and any Deist to the latter alone. But to say “There is No Natural Religion” without being a Thwackum, and at the same time to say “All Religions are One” without being a Square: that is the whole secret of wisdom. The reasoning Thwackum and the naturalistic Square are descended respectively from the theological Jews who thought Christianity a stumbling block and the pagan Greeks who thought it foolishness. To the one Blake says: “If Humility is Christianity, you, O Jews, are the true Christians,” and of the other he says: “If Morality was Christianity, Socrates was the Saviour.”<sup>[30](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn030)</sup> Humility and morality are the phobias induced by a passive mind, and neither attitude “contributed” anything at all to real Christianity, which was traveling the opposite way.

Similarly, the corporeal understanding of Milton sees him as a hideous twofold monster, half Puritan and half Deist, part of his mind sunk in a superstitious awe of a foolish God, part looking ahead to a society in which everyone will be tolerant about books and have reasonable views of divorce. Blake’s poem attempts to recreate the central vision of life, based on the Bible, which made Milton a great Christian poet. In this perspective the tug of war in him between the humble Puritan and the moral Deist becomes an accident of an age which is dead and gone. Blake is, therefore, trying to do for Milton what the prophets and Jesus did for Moses: isolate what is poetic and imaginative, and annihilate what is legal and historical. This is also what he is trying to do for himself, and there will always be a curse on any critic who tries to see the Christianity and the radicalism of Blake as a dichotomy instead of a unity.

• 6 •

WHAT we now have is a vision of mankind united in peace and brotherhood, their unity sustained not only by law, commerce and an international science, but by a common understanding of that view of life from which all religions and arts derive their meaning. This is a perfectly comprehensible idea, and an attractive one; but as soon as we have grasped it, Blake becomes obnoxious again. There is no reason to suppose that civilization at this level would affect the order of nature much more than it does now: that is, it would impose a good deal of discipline on Vala, or nature on earth, but it would not restore Enion from the depths of the sea or shake Enitharmon out of her crystal house. Yet, Blake says, as long as the sea surrounds us and the stars revolve above us, so long will man be a natural and a fallen man, and so long his natural tendencies will lead him to murder and tyranny. England and America cannot enter a Golden Age until the sea between them gives up its dead, and all men cannot unite except into one Man.

The Apocalypse speaks of a “millennium,” a thousand-year period of peace and security, at the end of the six thousand years of history, corresponding to the day of rest which followed the six days of creation. But all through the millennium, apparently, a gigantic power of evil, symbolized by the giants Gog and Magog, consolidates, and the struggle between the divine and Satanic principles, called Armageddon, does not stop short of a final assault on the stars. Those whose vision ends with a millennium or Utopia established in this world are still looking to history and the law, except that they put their Golden Age and their idealized legal contract in the future instead of in the past. Just as the tyranny of the past is the heart of all tyranny, however, so the mystery of the future is the heart of all mystery, and to judge our actions in terms of the perfunctory and generalized gratitude of posterity is merely inverted Pharisaism. But if the past can be recreated into the present, so can the future, and if the creative life begins, as we are told in *The Four Zoas*, with the merging of imagination and history, it must end, as we are told in *Jerusalem*, with their separation, when time no longer exists.<sup>[31](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn031)</sup> This brings us to the other aspect of the illumination of Milton and Blake, the vision of the world as the labor of Los displayed at the end of the first book.

The natural man is, speaking in terms of conscious vision, an imaginative seed. Just as the seed is a dry sealed packet of solid “matter,” so the natural mind is a tight skull-bound shell of abstract ideas. And just as the seed is surrounded by a dark world which we see as an underworld, so the physical universe, which surrounds the natural man on all sides, and is dark in the sense that he cannot see its extent, is the underworld of the mind, the den of Urthona, the cave of Plato’s *Republic.* The majority of seeds in nature die as seeds, and in human life all natural men, all the timid, all the stupid and all the evil, remain in the starlit cavern of the fallen mind, hibernating in the dormant winter night of time. They are embryos of life only, infertile seeds, and die within the seed-world. The possibility of life within them remains in its embryonic form of abstract ideas, shadows and dreams. Some of the dreams are troubled visions of the real world of awakened consciousness; others are the nightmares of paralyzing horror which all minds in a stupor of inertia are a prey to. Here and there a seed puts out a tentative shoot into the real world, and when it does so it escapes from the darkness of burial into the light of immortality. Such a seed, however, would only have begun its development, for the vegetable life is not the most highly organized form of life, because it is still bound to nature. The animal symbolizes a higher stage of development by breaking its navel-string, and this earth-bound freedom of movement is represented in our present physical level.

The bird is not a higher form of imagination than we are, but its ability to fly symbolizes one, and men usually assign wings to what they visualize as superior forms of human existence. In this symbolism the corresponding image of nature would be neither the seed-bed of the plant nor the suckling mother of the mammal, but the egg, which has been used as a symbol of the physical universe from the most ancient times. We think of cosmic eggs chiefly in connection with Gnostic and Orphic imagery, but the account of creation in Genesis as a watery chaos surrounded by a shell of “firmament,” which the Spirit of God, later visualized as a dove, broods upon and brings to life, also has oviparous overtones. In Blake the firmament is the Mundane Shell, the indefinite circumference of the physical world through which the mind crashes on its winged ascent to reality. To the inexperienced eye the egg appears to be a geometrical stone, but the imagination within the egg soon demonstrates that it is something much more fragile. The same is true of the Newtonian universe, the rock rolled against the tomb of divine humanity.

Whether we think of the natural man as a seed in the soil, an embryo in the womb, or an unborn chicken in the egg, however, in any event he is “self-centered,” or egocentric. That is, he is a center of perception: everything he regards as real he also regards as outside himself. His senses are all turned outward towards this reality, and everything he takes “in” immediately becomes unreal and “spectral.” Socially and morally, he tries to be an armored crustacean alert only for attack or defense: the price of selfishness is eternal vigilance. The closer society comes to the state of nature, the more tightly men huddle together to be on guard against possible dangers from without. This kind of Argus-eyed tenseness proceeds from a sealed prison of consciousness which Blake calls “opaque,” opacity being his symbol for the dead matter to which all nature tends, and of which the stone, the infertile eggs, the undeveloped seed, the sealed furnace which we met in *The Four Zoas*, and the herd-unity of the tyrannical society, are all images. As soon as a man acquires anything that can be called wisdom, this hostile and suspicious fear relaxes and he begins to be aware of an inner balance. This changes him from a center to a circumference of perception. His imagination begins to surround his experience like an amoeba: he becomes capable of sympathy because he has given other people shelter in his mind, and no longer thinks of them as opaque; and, as he can thereby see through them, he is equally capable of disinterested enmity. This process of mental growth Blake calls “opening a centre.”<sup>[32](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn032)</sup>

The man with an opened center is now a “microcosm,” a little world in himself. This term generally implies that nature is a corresponding “macrocosm,” an objective universal order to which man should adjust himself. But a macrocosm could only be a larger human body: the end of vision is the living form of humanity, not the mathematic form of nature. But how does one get from one to the other? What relation has the physical appearance of nature to the real mental form or body of Man? There is a curious passage in Exodus which tells how Moses went up to Mount Sinai and was permitted to see the “back parts” of God.<sup>[33](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn033)</sup> These back parts are traditionally interpreted as the material world, hence Moses’ vision was a vision of the totality of mystery, like Job’s of Leviathan and John’s of the Great Whore. Here the Bible comes perhaps nearer than at any other point to suggesting what is expressed in the Icelandic myth of Ymir, and in Blake by the description of the binding of Urizen by Los in seven ages, that nature is the scattered and broken body of a human God or Titan.

What we see in nature is our own body turned inside out. From our natural perspective we cannot see this for the same reason that a fly crawling on a fresco cannot see the picture: we are too small, too close, too unintelligent, and have naturally the wrong kind of eye. But the imagination sees that the labyrinthine intricacies of the movements of the heavenly bodies reflect the labyrinth of our brains. It sees that lakes and pools reflect the passive mirror of the eye. It sees that the revolving and warming sun is the beating and flaming heart of the fallen Albion, and is reproduced in the “Globe of Blood” within our own bodies. It sees that the tide flows and ebbs in the rhythm of Albion’s fallen lungs. It sees that the ridges of mountains across the world are Albion’s fractured spine. It sees that the natural circulation of water is a human circulation of blood. It sees that nature is the fossilized form of a God-Man who has, unlike other fossils, the power to come to life again. It sees that what vibration-frequencies are to color, what a prosodic analysis is to a poem, what an anatomized cadaver is to a body, so the physical world is to the mental one, the seamy side of its reality. And it sees all this because it realizes that when we see ourselves as imprisoned in a huge concave vault of sky we are seeing from the point of view of a head that is imprisoned in a concave vault of bone.

The telescope helps us to escape from this last dilemma, but introduces us directly to a more crucial one. Blake says that everything in eternity has what he calls a “vortex” (perhaps rather a vortex-ring), a spiral or cone of existence. When we focus both eyes on one object, say a book, we create an angle of vision opening into our minds with the apex pointing away from us. The book therefore has a vortex of existence opening into its mental reality within our minds. When Milton descends from eternity to time, he finds that he has to pass through the apex of his cone of eternal vision, which is like trying to see a book from the book’s point of view; the Lockian conception of the real book as outside the mind on which the vision of the fallen world is based. This turns him inside out, and from his new perspective the cone rolls back and away from him in the form of a globe. That is why we are surrounded with a universe of remote globes, and are unable to see that the earth is “one infinite plane.”<sup>[34](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn034)</sup> But in eternity the perceiving mind or body is omnipresent, and hence these globes in eternity are inside that body.

Before the Fall, Man was absolute wisdom, and was the circumference of everything. Nothing then existed outside Albion: sun, moon, stars, the center of the earth and the depth of the sea, were all within his mind and body, a body fully conscious of being alive, not only in its brain, but in all parts of itself down to the feet. Hence “opening a centre,” as described above, is the imagination’s way of reversing the fallen perspective of the world, and uniting an individual imagination with the universal one. This union is completed when in our vision the recurrent throb of existence which we know as time becomes the pulsating heart of a sleeping Man, and the revolving globes in the sky, seen as within instead of outside a human mind and body, become the corpuscles in a human bloodstream which is also the fourfold river of Paradise. That is what Blake means when he says that time is a pulsation of the artery, and space a globule of blood.<sup>[35](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn035)</sup> In eternity all the homes of the soul, the body, the palace, the city and the garden, are one; and the eternal community of men is also the real presence of a divine body, whose blood is the new wine created from the water of nature.

• 7 •

THIS enlightenment destroys the “female will” for Milton and enables him to attain his emanation Ololon. We have spoken before of the ambiguity of the word “consummation” in referring to the two chief aspects of the Last Judgment, the burning world and the sacred marriage. In *Milton*, too, the sacred marriage follows the vision of the absorption of nature into a fiery city. One may compare in Dante the poet’s passage through fire at the top of the mountain of purgatory, which completes the emancipation of his vision, and which is followed by his meeting with the young virgin Matilda in the garden of Eden. This in its turn is related to the larger scheme in which Dante’s epic predecessor takes him to what in Blake is the upper limit of Beulah, the ring of fire surrounding Eden, at which point the emanation Beatrice takes over. *The Faerie Queene*, too, was designed to end with an epithalamion; this end was never reached, but Spenser did write a poem in this genre for his own wedding, a poem which is part of his total vision. In Donne’s Anniversaries, the death of the poet’s emanation, who is a child like Ololon, transforms the world into an “anatomy” or skeleton for the hyena of reason to crunch; thus Donne presents the same vision in terms of its corresponding fall.

These parallels have been suggested to show how important the image of the emanation, the aggregate of all that a poet loves visualized as a bride, is in poetry. It is missing from Milton, and its absence is a radical defect in his vision. There is, of course, much in Milton’s portrayal of the “female will” in its sinister aspect which is quite sound. He felt that a wife and family were not so much hostages to fortune as to Satan, that the family was the main breach in the visionary’s defenses through which all the powers of compromise come pouring with their threats and their wheedling. The visionary’s right to cut himself loose from his family when his genius is in mortal danger was an essential part of Milton’s conception of liberty, and was perhaps the real reason for writing the divorce tracts. All this Blake agrees with, having no doubt suffered himself from Hayley’s attempts to “act upon my wife,”<sup>[36](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn036)</sup> and he makes it clear in *Jerusalem* that when Satan is the prince of this world,

A man’s worst enemies are those

Of his own house & family.<sup>[37](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn037)</sup>

Thus, the fall of Adam in *Paradise Lost* is ascribed to his idolatrous adoration of Eve, against which he was particularly warned by Raphael. The Fall began by the separation of Eve from Adam, and once that had taken place Eve became allied with the reasoning serpent. This closely approximates Blake’s account of the fall of Albion and his surrender to Vala, while “the vast form of Nature, like a Serpent, roll’d between.”<sup>[38](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn038)</sup> The role of Delilah in *Samson Agonistes* is symbolically identical with that of Eve, and the scene in which Samson casts her off shows more clearly what the divorce tracts mean than they do themselves. But one is struck by the fact that Milton never sees beyond this sinister “female will.” His vision of women takes in only the hostility and fear which it is quite right to assume toward the temptress who represents moral virtue, like Delilah among the Philistines or Eve before the tree of knowledge, but which is by no means the only way in which women can be visualized. There is no emanation in Milton; no Beatrice or Miranda; no vision of the spiritual nature of love. The love of Adam and Eve before the Fall is shown us only to make clear what dangers are concealed in it, and to contrast with the lust that emerges when those dangers are realized.

This is not simply the result of the nature of Milton’s temptation theme: it is a missing link in his poetic argument. In *Paradise Regained*, for instance, the proposal to tempt Christ with women is rejected out of hand by Satan as too obviously useless. Doubtless it was, but Satan twice assails Christ on the side of his hunger, and it is not apparent why he should have had so much higher an opinion of food. But the real crux of the question is *Comus. Comus* is introduced and concluded by a spirit who tells us that he has descended from a higher state of being associated with pastoral life and the gardens of Adonis—in other words, Beulah—to give instruction to the inhabitants of a fallen world. As he says, in a passage Blake may well have been thinking of when he put his little quatrain beginning “I give you the end of a golden string” into *Jerusalem:*

Yet some there be that by due steps aspire

To lay their just hands on that golden key

That opes the palace of eternity:

To such my errand is, and but for such,

I would not soil these pure ambrosial weeds,

With the rank vapors of this sin-worn mold.<sup>[39](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn039)</sup>

His home is in the Edenic island of the Hesperides, which (in an obscure passage in the Trinity MS) is associated both with England and with the “jealous ocean” which surrounds it, the ocean associated in Blake with the jealousy of Tharmas and Theotormon. The climax of the action is the arrival of the nymph Sabrina, who belongs to legendary British history and is one of Blake’s daughters of Albion. As Albion is Atlas, in Blake this means that she is also one of the Hesperides. Comus is a son of Circe, and Circe, whose home is in a western island, is Blake’s Rahab. Like his mother, Comus is a sorcerer who transforms men into a lower state of being, and who is a master of hallucination. He is also associated with night, and it is clear that Blake’s description of the rioting stars of Enitharmon’s “crystal house” in *Europe* who represent the quizzical indifference of the revolving heavens to man owes a good deal to his interpretation of Milton’s masque:

We that are of purer fire

Imitate the starry choir,

Who in their nightly watchful spheres,

Lead in swift round the months and years.<sup>[40](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn040)</sup>

We should expect *Com us*, then, to tell us something about the fall of Albion, or at any rate something of major visionary importance; but all that follows is an unsuccessful attempt to seduce a virgin. Now in the character of Comus Milton has begun to sketch a Satan far more essentially Satanic than his later prince of throned powers, and to make a seduction a climacteric revelation of evil is a grotesque anticlimax. Similarly, the frozen negative moral virtue of the Lady is praised as something good in itself, whereas in fact it is something much worse than anything Comus proposes to her. The coy mistress who represents an elusive nature is the most evil of all Blake’s symbols, and he associates her with the virginal Diana who turned Actaeon into an animal, which was exactly what Circe did to her lovers, and with the Medusa who freezes the living men of Generation into the stony world of Ulro. Blake, therefore, could hardly have read without a wry smile this praise of a virgin who in his own mythology is a whore:

Hence had the huntress Dian her dread bow

Fair silver-shafted queen forever chaste,

Wherewith she tamed the brinded lioness

And spotted mountain pard, but set at nought

The frivolous bolt of Cupid, gods and men

Feared her stern frown, and she was queen of the woods.

What was the snaky-headed Gorgon shield

That wise Minerva wore, unconquered virgin,

Wherewith she freezed her foes to congealed stone?

But rigid looks of chaste austerity,

And noble grace that dashed brute violence

With sudden adoration, and blank awe.

So dear to heaven is saintly chastity,

That when a soul is found sincerely so,

A thousand liveried angels lackey her….<sup>[41](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn041)</sup>

A thousand lackeying angels in livery can belong only to Nobodaddy.

One should not miss the quiet humor in Blake’s handling of this point. In the second part of *Milton*, Ololon appears in the world as a twelve-year-old girl, a child with a child’s untouchable beauty, not yet a bride of a sacred marriage but a breastless “little sister” like the one in the Song of Songs. She is respectfully referred to as the “Virgin Ololon” for several pages; but as the physical world burns up before Milton’s eyes, and all images of a separated female will cease to mean anything, her virginity splits away from her and runs shrieking into chaos, as the bride Ololon, purified of the stain of virginity, stands before the poet in his final consummation.

The Epilogue to the great poem is exquisitely managed. With the four Zoas sounding the trumpets of the Last Judgment in his ears, Blake falls into a swoon, and revives in his garden with his wife bending anxiously over him, and before him a singing lark and a wild thyme, the early-rising bird and the early-flowering plant of the returning spring. One thinks of an earlier William and Catherine awakening on an Easter morning with the church bells ringing as the poet’s dream of the triumph of Christ gives place to its audible symbol:

Tyl the day dawede · these damseles daunsede,

That men rang to the resurreccioun · and with that ich awakede,

And kallyd Kytte my wyf · and Kalote my doughter,

“A-rys, and go reuerence · godes resurreccioun.”<sup>[42](9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch10fn042)</sup>

Those who find the Prophecies noisy will perhaps not see that it is only the unearthly quiet of Blake’s tone that enables him to rise to the two visionary pinnacles of the poem and descend in the conclusion to his own backyard without a sense of anticlimax. Just before his head clears Blake gets a fleeting glimpse of still another vision:

Rintrah & Palamabron view the Human Harvest beneath.

Their Wine-presses & Barns stand open, the Ovens are prepar’d,

The Waggons ready; terrific Lions & Tygers sport & play.

All Animals upon the Earth are prepar’d in all their strength

To go forth to the Great Harvest & Vintage of the Nations

The last line, which has an entire plate to itself and no mark of punctuation after it, brings the whole poem, as it were, to an expectant dominant seventh, and reminds us that *Milton* is the prelude to a longer poem on the theme it announces, the building of a continuing city in the England of the Satanic mills.
