|                               |                                      |
|-------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| 12 | *THE BURDEN OF THE VALLEY OF VISION* |

WHEN *Jerusalem* was complete the canon of Blake’s poetry was complete too, or nearly so. However its final table of contents would have read, he had little organically to add to it. As it contains history, prophecy, creation myths, apocalyptic and wisdom literature, it perhaps would have contained, to round off the Biblical parallel, *The Everlasting Gospel*, which is later than *Jerusalem.* But in its essentials Blake’s poetic testament or “Bible of Hell” was ready for the world, apart from engraving, by about the end of 1808, and Blake lived until 1827.

This idea of an individual canon, apart altogether from the choice between good and bad poems which every poet makes, is neither peculiar to Blake nor a mark of egomania. If a man of genius spends all his life perfecting works of art, it is hardly farfetched to see his life’s work as itself a larger work of art with everything he has produced integral to it, as Balzac was not simply a man who wrote novels but a man whose novels constitute a *Comédie Humaine.* Blake is exceptional only in having said all he had to say in middle life, with twenty years of work ahead of him. We have mentioned Milton’s distinction between the brief and the diffuse epic: it occurs in a passage in which he speaks of them as two of the three great forms of poetry, the third being the drama. The passage is early, but nevertheless after reading it one realizes that *Paradise Lost, Paradise Regained* and *Samson Agonistes* make up a single poetic testament. Similarly when Spenser imitates Virgil in beginning with pastoral and going on to an epic, one can see that Spenser is also creating a canon out of his poetry.<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn001" id="ch12fn-001">1</a></sup>

The development of Spenser implies that, as an epic is necessarily a product of poetic maturity, the young poet will begin with lyrical forms, the pastoral being one of the most congenial of these. We have noticed that the pastoral form contains within itself a suggestion of satire on the imperfect nonpastoral reality of the world. Blake’s earlier poems are similarly lyrical both in mood and form, and tend to be either pastoral songs of innocence or satirical songs of experience. But as soon as Los appears, the tone becomes more didactic, and the characteristics of lyrical poetry, notably its profusion of natural images and its reproduction of the immediate impact of poetic vision, become subtilized. This development away from the lyrical mood is paralleled in the greatest poets, as we can see if we compare, say, *Coriolanus* with *A Midsummer Night’s Dream*, or *Paradise Regained* with *L’Allegro.* Those who think that Blake’s rich vein of poetry becomes increasingly varicose as he goes on, and that *Jerusalem* would be a better poem if it had more of the kind of beauty that *The Book of Thel* has, therefore assume that Blake should not have allowed himself to develop in the same direction. In any case, in *Jerusalem* the didactic tone has finally been absorbed into the form of the epic.

The fact that Blake finished his epic in the prime of life suggests, by elimination, that there was still before him a crowning period of dramatic art.<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn002" id="ch12fn-002">2</a></sup> This, though it sounds oversymmetrical, happens to fit Blake’s own views. The epic, in Blake’s sense, is a “divine vision” of the whole of life, and the drama in Blake’s sense is an episode of the divine vision. But here we imply a distinction between *a* divine vision, which is an epic, and *the* divine vision, which is something infinitely greater than any individual imagination can achieve. The drama relates to the latter, and illustrates episodes of an implicit and unformulated vision broader than any epic can suggest. Shakespeare, for instance, draws on a vision of such scope that it is doubtful if the most heroic effort of criticism would go far in formulating it. As Shakespeare was never an epic poet, he presumably never tried to formulate it himself; but he illustrates the fact that whereas the epic poet attains to a single vision of the world, the dramatic poet attains a perspective in which everything he sees takes on the universal significance of a still wider vision. The goal of this is what we have described as the universal perception of the particular, seeing the world in a grain of sand.

Now the drama proper demands a public support of a kind Blake was not very likely to receive. It is wrong to say that Blake could never have made a dramatist: Blake could have done anything. But the stage and he could never have been friends, and in any case the silent unity of vision in painting makes painting at least equally good as a dramatic medium, and a medium that Blake had already mastered. And of all forms of painting, fresco-painting on walls of public buildings is the most obviously dramatic. After writing *Jerusalem*, therefore, Blake began to experiment with different fresco mediums, and laying plans for a public appearance with a public proposal.

The English nation in Blake’s day has come to the historical crisis in which it has to choose whether it will follow the Orc cycle to its end or make the imaginative recreation of itself that will achieve a spiritual England as the Hebrew prophets achieved a spiritual Israel. Winter is approaching, and a great harvest of culture and prophecy is waiting: the English may gather it in and await a millennial spring, or allow it to rot in the fields. So far, they are considering the ways of the grasshopper and being foolish. Lockian doctrines of a passive mind and an external nature have spread over all the arts, to their infinite damage. The English still have the Bible and their great poets, but no longer understand how to use their imaginations in reading them, and the visionary tradition is now a broken and straggling line.

Blake will of course be told that England is at war with Napoleon and is too busy for extra things. This is exactly his point. The decline of imaginative power in England is closely connected with the fact that England is an empire at war, and is approaching barbarism not so much because it is at war as because it is an empire. If Napoleon wins (a very possible view in 1809), Blake may help England, under a *pax Gallica*, to lead captive her conqueror, as Greece did Rome<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn003" id="ch12fn-003">3</a></sup>; but the centrifugal force of imperial ambitions, which sucks all genius out of the country, will only be stimulated by victory. The probabilities indicate that London will follow the Orc cycle to where Rome has gone, and where Babylon and Egypt went before Rome; that England will become a natural and reasonable state in which religion and philosophy will subside into fatalism and moral virtue, art into a luxury trade, and mass war, mass tyranny and mass slavery crush its great cities into swarming anthills, while genius and prophecy go wherever there are still living men to be found.

A certain exhaustion of vitality, at the end of a cycle of civilization, is inevitable insofar as it is part of an organic process. But a man should grow wiser because he must grow older, and the same is true of a nation. The function of the prophet is not to point out what is inevitable, but to show what can be built up out of an inevitable development. The real lesson of history is contained in the instructive contrast between the evolutionary Hebraic and the cyclic Classical cultures, and the violent hatred of the latter which Blake expresses from *Milton* on, and which incites him to such utterances as “It is the Classics, & not Goths nor Monks, that Desolate Europe with Wars,”<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn004" id="ch12fn-004">4</a></sup> is motivated by his intense desire to point this moral. To the rule stated above that empires do not inspire major art the chief exception is Virgil, and Virgil shows the cloven hoof in the sixth book of the *Aeneid*, where the Sibyl’s prophecy assigns conquest to Rome and the arts to more effeminate nations, a passage which really means that Rome’s greatest poet is acquiescing in the degeneration of his own culture.<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn005" id="ch12fn-005">5</a></sup> The Hebrew prophets, by the imaginative recreation of their culture, produced Jesus: the English, if they do the same thing, can produce a second coming of Jesus.

Blake, therefore, must come forward to insist that “Empire follows Art & Not Vice Versa as Englishmen suppose.”<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn006" id="ch12fn-006">6</a></sup> He will use his canon as a new testament for English culture. He will teach the English how to use their imaginations, how to develop the immense reserves of power that they are leaving untapped. A savage confronted with a modern metropolis *is confronted* only with a minor example of what the same human imagination that exists in himself can do. Between a commonplace England and a spiritual England there will be the same link but a far greater contrast, and an awakened England would make short work of Napoleon, as of all the rest of its previous dreams. The answer to the popular estimate of the comparative values of a civilized and a practical life is:

I am really sorry to see my Countrymen trouble themselves about Politics. If Men were Wise, the Most arbitrary Princes could not hurt them. If they are not wise, the Freest Government is compell’d to be a Tyranny. Princes appear to me to be Fools. Houses of Commons & Houses of Lords appear to me to be fools; they seem to me to be something Else besides Human Life.<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn007" id="ch12fn-007">7</a></sup>

It is perhaps not a wholly satisfactory answer, but it belongs to the type of thinking that Blake feels he must introduce to the English mind. Otherwise he would be what he is called in *Point Counterpoint:* “the last civilized man.” Had Blake heard himself so described in his lifetime, it might have been the one thing that could have broken his spirit.

Blake’s primary objective is to revive public painting: the revival of other aspects of civilization will then follow more easily. Against him will be the whole trading combination of commercial painters, with their patrons and connoisseurs: with him will be the common sense of English public opinion. It will be necessary for Blake to write manifestoes explaining the facts of the situation. He will have to tell the public something of his own career in order to establish his right to speak and to clear himself of an unusually malicious series of personal slanders. And if he explains that his reputation as a fool and madman has been built up by a clique of unscrupulous competitors, and brings forward his pictures to prove it, the public is bound to listen to him. “Truth,” he had said, “can never be told so as to be understood, and not be believ’d.”<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn008" id="ch12fn-008">8</a></sup> He will also have to explain that there is no mystery about art, and that those who insist on one are humbugs. The sense of mystery comes from a timid lack of confidence in the imagination. The best that has been thought and said, or painted or composed, in the world, is within the reach of everyone, and those who do not possess the highest pleasures and the richest wisdom are being swindled, whether by themselves or by others.

In the periods of highest civilization, the arts which depend on social co-operation are in an especially flourishing state. These are the dramatic or public arts produced by a group for the benefit of a group, as an ensemble performance for an audience. The chief arts of this kind are music, drama, fresco-painting and architecture. It was during the Gothic and high Renaissance periods, the ages of Chaucer and Michelangelo, that these arts were at their highest development. The lack of fresco-painting in England may be explained by the fact that it never did develop in England to the extent that it did in Italy. But music and drama did; and of all the arts in England in Blake’s time none are in a more pitiful condition than those two. Blake’s immediate program, being concerned with the re-establishment of fresco in public buildings, involves an overthrow of the easel oil-painting monopoly and a return to the pure colors and sharp outlines which only fresco and water-color can give. It also involves a renewed appreciation of the merits of Gothic and Renaissance culture, when art had more of its proper social basis and a generally understood language of symbolism.

By 1809 Blake had found a very simple formula for making fresco-painting commercially practicable. Take, he says, a surface of wood or canvas, spread a plaster coating over it, and paint the fresco on the plaster. Such a fresco is painted, not directly on a wall to remain there as long as the building itself does, but on a temporary or removable wall, and can be changed at pleasure or transferred somewhere else. Blake thereupon held the first private exhibition of his life and wrote for it a full *Descriptive Catalogue.* This catalogue was intended, first of all, to set forth his new idea, and the pictures of the exhibition were to illustrate what the process would do and how durable it was. With the utter guilelessness that one finds only in genius and sanctity, Blake urges the reader to see how some of the pictures have been “laboured to a superabundant blackness” and how others “have been bruized and knocked about without mercy, to try all experiments.”<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn009" id="ch12fn-009">9</a></sup> Second, the catalogue was to hint at the infinite possibilities of such a scheme: how gigantic public projects rivaling the greatest works of the Italian Renaissance would be possible, and how, if the right people would give commissions, a very dingy country would suddenly find itself in possession of majestic frescoes of startling brilliance and freshness of color, like brand-new Giottos. Third, the catalogue was to point out the disadvantages of oil, show how blurred and smudged its effects are and how unsuitable it is as a medium for heroic painting, which demands a jewel-like clarity in the smallest details. Fourth, it was to indicate how the man of vision looks at his time, and how political events and figures are evolved by the artist into imperishable forms. Blake includes pictures of the “spiritual forms” of Pitt and Nelson, which he explains could be executed in the same medium in a public building on a colossal scale. Fifth, it was to give a rough outline of the British archetypal myth, showing how the legends of Albion, Arthur, Druids, ancient Bards, the island of Atlantis and other fragments fit together into a pattern by means of which the British nation can develop a set of historical conventions for the artist to use, as religious conventions were employed in medieval painting. Blake refers in passing to having written a poem which explains this myth more fully. Sixth, it provides an elaborate criticism of Chaucer in order to show the British public what immense store-houses of genius they have in their own poets if they will only read them with some effort of the imagination, and in order also to show what the despised Gothic age could produce. Blake was clearly not aware that he was living in the middle of the Romantic movement. Many other points are dealt with in this catalogue, including the bringing of Swedenborg and the *Bhagavadgita* to public attention, but these are the chief ones.

The *Descriptive Catalogue* was to be the opening gun of the campaign: a “Public Address” explaining Blake’s own position and attitude to art would follow, and a history of art (which promised to be of phenomenal inaccuracy) putting the fresco-painting of the Gothic and Renaissance ages in its true perspective and reducing the stature of the oil-painters to something more like its proper level.<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn010" id="ch12fn-010">10</a></sup> The English public would also be taught what to look for in contemporary painting, and how to find more of it in a great mind like Fuseli than in a fashionable eclectic like Reynolds. In this connection it may be noted that the vitriolic marginalia to Reynolds’ *Discourses*, written about the same time, are directly addressed to a reader. The scheme of writing a series of poems in doggerel verse, defending the genuine artists and attacking the sham ones, was probably soon abandoned. The few lines we have from a projected *Barry* and a *Book of Moonlight* do not look very promising.<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn011" id="ch12fn-011">11</a></sup> It is possible too that Blake had in mind some biographical prophecies which would round out the symbolism of the Hayley quarrel in *Milton* and the Schofield trial in *Jerusalem* by adding to it other features of the conspiracy of mediocrity against genius which he felt to be taking shape in his own life. As he says: “Secret Calumny & open Professions of Friendship are common enough all the world over, but have never been so good an occasion of Poetic Imagery.”<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn012" id="ch12fn-012">12</a></sup>

So Blake hopes that his quiet little Exhibition will be the birthday of the Renaissance of English art, and perhaps of greater things still, for Blake, like Milton, felt that his talents were not given him to hide and that the right genius at the right time might speak the great Word that would shatter the walls of the human prison. Besides, “if a man is master of his profession,” Blake says, “he cannot be ignorant that he is so,”<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn013" id="ch12fn-013">13</a></sup> and there can be no reasonable doubt that his is the greatest creative genius working in England in 1809. It is therefore his duty to step forward and guide England into the road leading to a clean and beautiful civilization. He is not, like his enemies, a clever advertiser; but he has his work and his plan, and if he does his duty he may expect England to do hers. Robert Hunt of the *Examiner*, the only one who reviewed the Exhibition at all, gave England’s answer:

… an unfortunate lunatic whose personal inoffensiveness secures him from confinement, and consequently of whom no public notice would have been taken, if he was not forced on the animadversion of the *Examiner* in having been held up to public admiration by many esteemed amateurs and professors as a genius in some respects original and legitimate. The praises which these gentlemen bestowed last year on this unfortunate man’s illustrations to Blair’s *Grave* have, in feeding his vanity, stimulated him to publish his madness more largely, and this again exposed him, if not to the derision, at least to the pity of the public…. Thus encouraged, the poor man fancies himself a great master, and has painted a few wretched pictures…. These he calls an Exhibition, of which he has published a catalogue, or rather a farrago of nonsense, unintelligibleness and egregious vanity, the wild effusions of a distempered brain….<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn014" id="ch12fn-014">14</a></sup>

• 2 •

IT is unpleasant to have to admit that there is anything in the public reception of Blake’s offer to be defended, but there is a very real sense in which Blake was on the wrong track. It is clear that Blake had much more to demonstrate than his technical ability to carry out such a scheme. A long line of prophets between Blake’s day and our own, including Ruskin and Morris, have not yet achieved even the beginning of what he hoped for. Like most of his successors, Blake insists that communal art, in particular fresco-painting, is essential to a civilized society; like them, he realizes that social reform is really a revival of art; like them, he points to medieval and Renaissance culture as providing in many respects, with all their faults, a healthier milieu for art than capitalist imperialism. Blake’s failure indicates that, like many men of genius, he was inclined to overestimate the ease with which a public can transform itself into another kind of public; at least he overestimated its willingness to try. The artist follows Los and the New Testament: for him, anything that we want to do, whether abolish war, settle a country, plan a society or enter the millennium, we can do and do at once, and his motto is always “The time is at hand.” Society follows the Spectre of Urthona, and, even when it agrees on the desirability of the goal, it insists that all such changes take a very long time, and that it will take centuries for some vaguely defined historical ghost to work up the courage to improve its status.

It would have been possible, even in Blake’s time, for a nation’s imaginative energies to become centripetal and national rather than centrifugal and imperial, and in an atmosphere of growing national and racial consciousness his plan might have received more attention. But a cultural leader bent on reviving dramatic art in such a milieu, whether in music, drama or fresco, would have to be a very different kind of man. He would have to give the public what would appeal not only to their sense of community but to their sense of herded solidarity; that is, he would have to appeal to both the best and the worst tendencies of his nation, and would therefore himself have to be both genius and megalomaniac. As a genius he would visualize great things, and as a megalomaniac he would carry them out in the teeth of frantic opposition. As a genius he would give his nation its archetypal vision, but his achievement would be too egocentric to leave an integrated tradition behind. But Blake was not Wagner, nor was England Germany. Blake had had to sacrifice a great many things to purify his art, but the public was now forcing him to reject one thing more, and it was something it was on the whole as well that he should reject.

There is no question of the social value of art or of the social significance of the artist. But Blake’s willingness to become a public leader of art shows a confusion in his mind between two things which are carefully distinguished in the Prophecies: the imagination and the will, Los and the Spectre of Urthona, the struggle of art to perfect its vision and the attempt of the will to alter the world of experience. If Blake had listened to the “Rintrah” within him, he would have been told that as a public figure he would have to give the public what it wanted: an ambiguous phrase, resting on an inability to distinguish between what the public imagination wants and what the public Selfhood wants. The only legitimate compulsion on the artist is the compulsion to clarify the form of his work, and in accepting other compulsions he is at once trapped in compromise. His forms are spoiled by the shifting of emphasis necessary for didactic purposes; his tone is made raucous by the self-hypnotism with which a constant and expectant audience may infect any artist. There is simply no such thing as a “Hero as Poet,” and when Milton, for instance, was gloating over his duel with Salmasius, a public joust for liberty “with which all Europe rings from side to side,” he was talking nonsense and writing imaginative trash. And if the artist cannot be a public hero, neither can he be wholly a public servant. He must compromise as little as possible with the “necessary” social hypocrisies of the kind which force him to idealize whatever at the moment is being idolized, such as Pitt or Nelson, either of whom may be vilified next day *pour encourager les autres.* And although Blake’s Pitt and Nelson are not idealized, but are in fact very sinister figures, that will merely develop the cleavage between the select few and the misunderstanding many which will destroy all public art.

There is of course more to be said about the artist’s relation to society than this, but Blake’s great value as a personal influence in English literature is that he is so outstanding an example of a precious quality of mental independence. Very few writers even in England have been so startlingly free of accepted shibboleths in religion, morality or politics. His attitude of mind is a kind of reverent Philistinism, with a broad humor that delights to spread banana peelings in the paths of heroes, a simple pleasure in seeing the aura of sanctity around traditional arcana as a fog, and a tough honesty that continues to repeat that war is always damnable and tyranny always stupid and persecution always evil, however “necessary” at any given moment. Cockney cheek and the Nonconformist conscience, two of the most resolute and persistent saboteurs of the dark Satanic mills in English life, combine in Blake to establish an incorruptible mental court without appeal to which all apologies for the traditional and conventional are referred. The public’s contemptuous neglect of Blake was as wrong and foolish as it could be, but nevertheless Blake owes much of his integrity to his isolation. We have said that Blake’s theory of poetry would have been more easily accepted had he lived in the Renaissance, but as he lived when he did, we have a unique example of an artist saying what he pleased without the least tendency, which social recognition often encourages, toward the parasitic in literature, the sycophantic in politics or the malignant in religion.

• 3 •

PRACTICALLY all the poetry Blake wrote after *Jerusalem* was occasional. One such poem, the dedication of his “Last Judgment” to the Countess of Egremont, written in 1808, speaks of the canon as more or less closed. This occasional poetry shows no sign of a falling-off in technical competence: it shows only that Blake still could write exquisitely or powerfully whenever he wanted to and that he no longer often wanted to. As an artist, however, Blake has one of the busiest lives on record: he had been in his youth an infant prodigy who refused to burn out, and he was to become at seventy a veteran who had wasted no time in search of a style. With his scheme of portable frescoes ignored he would have to turn to something else. And, if our interpretation is correct, he would find something in his own restricted sphere of activity at least as important to art as his portable frescoes would have been, even if Parliament had given him *carte blanche* to fill England with them.

The transition from prophecy to painting is at first only a shift of emphasis. In the first place, Blake stops illustrating poems and starts commenting on pictures. Take, for example, his treatment of the Last Judgment. In *The Four Zoas* we have a long and ecstatic poetic treatment of this theme: in *Milton* and *Jerusalem* the treatment is far more compressed and is set in a pictorial design. Following *Jerusalem* come pictures with commentaries. The Last Judgment design in the illustrations to Blair’s *Grave* referred to by Hunt is still an illustration to a poem, but an illustration quite independent of its text. Then we have the great painting for the Countess of Egremont, with the descriptive commentary preserved in a letter, and the short dedicatory lyric mentioned above. As a climax to this series comes the still larger design, perhaps intended to be the first of the great masterpieces of the last period, of which nothing remains except a commentary. In the second place, Blake’s chief interest in writing passes from creation to criticism, and from poetry to prose. Even in the prophecies themselves we can see that the poetic utterance becomes for Blake increasingly a means of explanation or comment on the central form of the poem, and after *Jerusalem* all his important literary ambitions were concerned with prose criticism. The prophecies were re-engraved, but with one exception were not rewritten or redesigned.<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn015" id="ch12fn-015">15</a></sup>

We have seen how important in Blake’s theory of art is his conception of the recreation of the archetype, the process which unites a sequence of visions, first into a tradition, then into a Scripture. The next step for Blake is obviously, therefore, to illustrate other poets’ visions so that their readers may more easily understand their archetypal significance. Blake had always done this to some extent, but not so systematically as he began to do it now. Here he found a formula for uniting the work of the creator with that of the teacher, of combining mythopoeic art with instruction in how to read it, not as spectacular as the one he had planned, but possibly no less rewarding.

The most important works that fall under this classification are the Chaucer painting, the Milton and Bunyan series, the Biblical illustrations, the Dante and the Job. Here we have again a steady advance in objectivity. There is only one Chaucer painting, with an elaborate criticism of the poet. The illustrations to Milton’s lyrical poems are simply described, with a few suggestive hints,<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn016" id="ch12fn-016">16</a></sup> and those to his epics have no explanatory text at all. Blake may have had some idea of presenting the whole Bible, including the pseudepigraphic Book of Enoch which was first made available to him in 1821,<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn017" id="ch12fn-017">17</a></sup> in the form of his own vision, and some fragmentary annotations to the Book of Genesis which still remain may be a relic of this.<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn018" id="ch12fn-018">18</a></sup> The Dante sketches and engravings, wonderful as they are, are a little out of the line of Blake’s development, as Dante was not the fructifying influence on Blake that the Hebrew and English poets were; in any case Blake has left us only a few rather disgruntled comments on the other great Gothic poet.<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn019" id="ch12fn-019">19</a></sup> Finally comes the *Vision of the Book of Job*, where comment is made entirely by quotation. There is also a steady increase in independence of the subject, from the Chaucer painting, where Blake boasts of his fidelity to Chaucer’s text, to the recreation of the drama of Job in a sequence of plates which, though a profound commentary on that poem, is clearly not a series of illustrations to it, but an independent art-form.

The two units of art, to Blake, are the audible unit, which is the word in poetry, and the visible unit, which is the image or outlined form. Words in their turn may have suggestive associations of sound both with one another and with the images they represent. All languages develop words of great onomatopoeic effectiveness, and while most of this may be called accidental, it is the poet’s business to make as systematic a use as possible of such accidents. What we call imitative harmony in poetry is thus a poet’s attempt to unite more closely the audible and the visible units of art. The same point is also illustrated by the words which the poet invents, such as names of characters. Lilliputian is a good name for a pygmy because it suggests the sounds of “little” and “puny,” and Ebenezer Scrooge a good name for a miser because it suggests the sounds of “squeeze” and “screw.” Similarly Blake’s Luvah contains the sound of “love,” Urizen of “reason,” Urthona of “north,” “earth” and “throne.”<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn020" id="ch12fn-020">20</a></sup>

The sounds of words are represented by letters, and letters, though visual signs, are now largely arbitrary ones. The alphabetic system of writing can be traced back to the Semitic people of “Canaan,” and perhaps if we knew more about it we should discover that it was not a moral code but an alphabet that the Hebrews learned at Mount Sinai, from a God with enough imagination to understand how much more important a collection of letters was than a collection of prohibitions:

Who in mysterious Sinai’s awful cave

To Man the wondrous art of writing gave.<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn021" id="ch12fn-021">21</a></sup>

The names of the Hebrew letters are also names of things, which suggests that the letters were originally pictographs, units at once of sound and of imagery. It is understandable then that Hebrew traditions should have preserved in Cabbalism a respect for the letter as well as the word of their Scripture, and perhaps one may see in the Cabbalistic frenzy of superstitious pedantry an “analogy” of the vision of a God who is Alpha and Omega. (The intensity of thought is often in proportion to its verbalism, and the most important of all human disputes, the Arian controversy over whether Jesus was the “Similitude” or the “Identity” of the Godhead, was fought over literally a single iota of difference.) It was no doubt the influence of what he knew of Cabbalism that caused Blake to say of *Jerusalem* that not only every word but every letter in it had been “studied.” After *Jerusalem* we can see in his work a development toward the pictograph, and in the Job engravings we are getting down to the very bedrock of imaginative communication, a series of images which are at once pictures and hieroglyphs, rather like what the characters of Chinese must originally have been, in which the common basis of writing and drawing, that is, of poetry and painting, has been re-established.

At the end of the sixth chapter we suggested that the combination of musical, pictorial and poetic characteristics in Blake’s prophecies made them unified visions of the three major arts, presented to the individual as the musical drama, the Greek play with its chorus, the Elizabethan play with its songs, or the modern opera, oratorio or ballet, present them to an audience. Of all these forms, the ballet unites music and drama on their common basis in the dance, just as the Job engravings unite poetry and painting on their common basis in hieroglyphic, and it can hardly be an accident that Blake’s vision of Job makes an excellent ballet. In all periods of his life, Blake moves toward undifferentiated art, art addressed not to a sense but to the mind that opens the senses.

Blake’s pictographs are to be interpreted in terms of their sequential relationship to one another, as a progression of signs which, like the alphabet, spell out not a word but the units of all words. According to Bacon the experimenter searches nature for its underlying principles or forms, and Bacon believed it probable that there were comparatively few of these forms, which, when discovered, would be to knowledge what an alphabet is to a language. And, reading imagination for experiment and art for nature, Blake also seems to be striving for an “alphabet of forms,” a Tarot pack of pictorial visions which box the entire compass of the imagination in an orderly sequence. The alphabet itself, if we may do some illustrative guessing, may be a fossil of some such work of art, the Zodiacal signs another, and the Tarot pack (with which the Job series has been associated<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn022" id="ch12fn-022">22</a></sup>) a third. The *Vision of the Book of Job* has twenty-two plates, the number of letters in the Hebrew alphabet, just as the Homeric epic, according to its Alexandrian editors, has a book for every letter in the Greek alphabet. Here we have gone from a dramatic medium into a new kind of epic. For the equivalent of the epic in the plastic arts is evidently the kind of imaginative alphabet seen in its “brief” form in Blake’s Job and in its “diffuse” form in the encyclopedic symbolism of the medieval cathedrals. The former was what Blake actually produced; the latter was what he offered to take the lead in helping to reproduce.

• 4 •

IT is clear that the argument over whether art is complete in itself or suggests something beyond itself, whether it is pure form or a guide to better living, amoral delight or ornamental instruction, is dealt with by Blake as he deals with all questions that are cracked down the middle by a cloven fiction. According to Blake, no such dilemma exists: if it were possible to delight without instruction, there could be no qualitative difference between painting the Sistine ceiling and cutting out paper dolls; if it were possible to instruct without delighting, art would be merely the kindergarten class of philosophy and science. There is nothing to be said for the shivering virgin theory of art, according to which art is a fragile evocation of pure beauty surrounded by rough disciplines such as theology and morals, and in constant danger of being polluted by them. There is nothing to be said either for the thus-we-see theory which finds the meaning of art in a set of moral generalizations inferred from it. The work of art suggests something beyond itself most obviously when it is most complete in itself: its integrity is an image or form of the universal integration which is the body of a divine Man. All Blake’s own art, therefore, is at the same time an attempt to achieve absolute clarity of vision and a beginner’s guide to the understanding of an archetypal vision of which it forms part. We cannot understand Blake without understanding how to read the Bible, Milton, Ovid and the Prose Edda at least as he read them, on the assumption that an archetypal vision, which all great art without exception shows forth to us, really does exist. If he is wrong, we have merely distorted the meaning of these other works of prophecy; if he is right, the ability we gain by deciphering him is transferable, and the value of studying him extends far beyond our personal interest in Blake himself.

Any student of Blake may come to feel that he insists too much on revelation, that his lights are too intense and glaring, that he does not sufficiently sympathize with a reader’s tendency to feel let down when a tantalizing mystery is fully explained. Surely the deliberate illusion of the magician has a place in art as well as mental enlightenment. This is more or less the feeling already referred to that the Prophecies are too diagrammatic to have the poetic impact of great art, or even to be consistent with Blake’s own condemnation of arid and “spectral” rationalism. We tried to explain this, however, in terms of Blake’s historical context. It is all very well for Socrates to point out that the poet’s inspiration is one thing and his conscious understanding of what he is saying another. The Greek dramatists contemporary with Socrates could make mythological figures humanly credible because a great deal of their work was done for them: they were interpreting religious and historical traditions to which their audiences were already prepared to attach an archetypal significance. The same is true of Milton’s Satan: it is even true, though less obviously so, of many of Shakespeare’s characters. It is, for instance, impossible to understand the significance of Shylock, the Jew who represents a humor of revenge and a confidence in a bond and a law and a just judgment, without a fairly comprehensive grasp of the argument of the Christian Bible; and however the Puritan preacher around the corner might thunder against the godless playhouse, he would sooner or later, if he knew his job of expounding Scripture, educate his hearers in the understanding of Shylock.

The audience of a Greek or Christian poet would find it difficult to understand barbarian or heathen symbolism unless it were first translated into the terms familiar to them. That fact does not affect the poet, or limit his universal significance; it relates solely to the audience. In Christian times most of Virgil’s readers assumed that his fourth eclogue was a prophecy of the Christian Messiah. That has the great advantage of seeing an archetypal pattern in the poem, and is far ahead of the merely incompetent criticism which sees nothing in it but extravagant flattery. Insofar as such readers conceived of the truth of Christianity as rational rather than visionary, it has the disadvantage of distorting Virgil’s meaning. That is a serious but by no means fatal defect; interpreting Virgil’s symbolism in Christian terms is translation, and translation may be legitimate even though it always has to ignore many aspects of the poet’s original achievement. It is better to read Virgil in the original symbolism as well as the original language, but the one, like the other, must have a meaning communicable to us. Every poet, including Blake, must first be studied in connection with his *own* age, but there comes a point at which the value of this study becomes exhausted and the conception of “anachronism” is rendered meaningless. What makes the poet worth studying at all is his ability to communicate beyond his context in time and space: we therefore are the present custodians of his meaning, and the profundity of his appeal is relative to our own outlook.

It is here that Blake comes in with his doctrine that “all had originally one language, and one religion.”<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn023" id="ch12fn-023">23</a></sup> If we follow his own method, and interpret this in imaginative instead of historical terms, we have the doctrine that all symbolism in all art and all religion is mutually intelligible among all men, and that there is such a thing as an iconography of the imagination. Blake suggests to the student of English literature that to recognize the existence of a total form of vision would not be a new discovery, but a return to essential critical principles that should never have been lost sight of. If we look back at Elizabethan scholars, with their rhetorical textbooks and mythological handbooks, their commentaries on Plutarch and Ovid and their allegorical interpretations of Homer and Virgil, we may see that when Chapman spoke of “not onely all learning, gouernment, and wisedome being deduc’t as from a bottomlesse fountaine from him \[Homer\], but all wit, elegancie, disposition, and judgement,”<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn024" id="ch12fn-024">24</a></sup> he meant exactly what he said. It is merely an attempt to complete the humanist revolution, then, to point out that the conception of the Classical in art and the conception of the scriptural or canonical in religion have always tended to approximate one another; that the closer the approximation, the healthier it is for both religion and art; that on this approximation the authority of humane letters has always rested, and that the sooner they are identified with each other the better. Such a cultural revolution would absorb not only the Classical but all other cultures into a single visionary synthesis, deepen and broaden the public response to art, deliver the artist from the bondage of a dingy and nervous naturalism called, in a term which is a little masterpiece of question-begging, “realism,” and restore to him the catholicity of outlook that Montaigne and Shakespeare possessed. And though the one religion would be, as far as Blake is concerned, Christianity, it would be a Christianity equated with the broadest possible vision of life, so that it would simply be reading Virgil with the maximum instead of the minimum of imaginative power to see once again the form of the Prince of Peace in Pollio’s baby, and unite the Roman poet’s *“occidet et serpens”* with the tempter of Eve and Midgard.

The great value of Blake is that he insists so urgently on this question of an imaginative iconography, and forces us to learn so much of its grammar in reading him. He differs from other poets only in the degree to which he compels us to do this. The disadvantage of demonstrating a total form of vision from Homer or Shakespeare is that they give so much for so little effort, and it is easy for their commentators to incur the charge of needless over-subtlety. The advantage of demonstrating it from Blake’s Prophecies is that without it, except to the rare and lucky possessor of a set of the original engravings, they give almost nothing. Homer and Shakespeare are not superficial, but they do possess a surface, and reward superficial reading more than it deserves. The reason for Blake’s uniqueness is that in his day certain conditions which he blamed, perhaps with some reason, on Locke and the Deists, had brought about a great decline both in mythopoeic art and in the public ability to respond to it. With the exaggeration natural to one in his position, he thought of his age as much less mythopoeic than it actually was; but still he was essentially right in his feeling that archetypal symbolism in his day, if not exactly, in his own words, drawn into one man’s loins, was still rare enough for a very explicit treatment of it to be poetically justifiable.

Mythopoeic art revived in the Romantic period, but under the influence of a metaphysic that tended to think of the world of appearance as the object of knowledge and the world of reality within it as unknowable, or, at best, revealed only in flashes of intuition. Hence the importance of suggestive evocation in Romantic art, with its implication that the comprehension of symbolic meanings is a haphazard and fitful process. Our art has passed beyond Romanticism, but our criticism is still largely in it. It is still generally felt that the mythopoeic faculty in art is subconscious, and that if one wishes to produce effective symbolism one must, as Johnson said of Ossian, abandon one’s mind to it. Poets are still studied in terms of the Romantic psychological myth of a subliminal real self conflicting with a censorious rational consciousness. Great Christian poems from *Beowulf* to *The Faerie Queene* and beyond have been explained as glossing an instinctive paganism by a perfunctory Christianity, and great tragedies have been interpreted as more or less disguised expressions of philosophical pessimism, of the kind fashionable in the Romantic period. And though we should not get far in science or mathematics without a feeling of pleasurable excitement in solving puzzles, the complicated pattern is felt to be somehow vulgar in poetry. We are encouraged not to rack the arts to search their profundities, but to respond to them with a sensitive receptivity, a relaxed awareness of “appreciation” which, whatever may be said for it, is clearly not what Dante and Spenser expected from their readers. And now that poets have become, in Shelley’s phrase, unacknowledged legislators, critics, with one great exception, have largely forgotten their own language, like Kingsley’s gorilla. Ruskin spoke that language in a diffuse splutter with a thick moral accent, but he did speak it, and illuminated four or five arts with his knowledge of it. But this part of his work attracted few disciples, and the present response to symbolism in art seems to be content with a state of amiable confusion.

The allegorical approach to literature is often, therefore, spoken of as a fantastic freak of pedantry, though it lasted for centuries, and probably millennia, whereas our modern neglect of it is an ignorant parvenu of two centuries and a half. Surely if the word “pedantry” means anything, it means that kind of contact with culture which consists in belittling the size and scope of the conceptions of genius, the “nothing but” principle of reading everything on the minimum imaginative level. It is of course true that one may read too much into a poem, but as Blake says, “If the fool would persist in his folly he would become wise,” and oversubtlety is an example of the sort of folly he had in mind. Imaginative intensity applied to a wrong or inadequate object can be corrected; a deficiency in intensity never can be. Of course those who are incapable of distinguishing between a recognition of archetypes and a Procrustean methodology which forces everything into a prefabricated scheme would be well advised to leave the whole question alone. But it is with symbolism as with etymology: the true course is neither to accept all resemblances as proving common descent from a single ancestor, nor reject them all as coincidence, but to establish the laws by which the real relationships may be recognized. I£ such laws exist, it will be quite possible to develop an imaginative accuracy in reading the arts which is not, like the accuracy of pedantry, founded purely on inhibitions.

The Romantic tradition has one thing in it of great value: it encourages the poet to find his symbols in his own way, and does not impose *a priori* patterns on his imagination. Blake could have told Baudelaire that if he pursued his vision of evil far enough, it would eventually take the form of a gigantic, cruel, elusive and shadowy whore, drunk with the blood of poets and part of the indifference of the order of nature, whom Blake himself calls Rahab. And it was perhaps an advantage to Baudelaire not to be told that. But the advantage of having a large public able instantly to recognize his giantess would far outweigh the very remote possibility that he would not have had sense enough to realize, as Blake did, that he should create his own symbolic system and not be enslaved by another man’s.<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn025" id="ch12fn-025">25</a></sup> It is with criticism as with so many other aspects of contemporary life: for better or worse the reign of *laissez faire* is over, and the problem of achieving order without regimentation is before us.

It is fortunate that art does not have to wait for critical theory to keep pace with it. The age that has produced the hell of Rimbaud and the angels of Rilke, Kafka’s castle and James’s ivory tower, the spirals of Yeats and the hermaphrodites of Proust, the intricate dying-god symbolism attached to Christ in Eliot and the exhaustive treatment of Old Testament myths in Mann’s study of Joseph, is once again a great mythopoeic age. In *Finnegans Wake*, apparently, we are being told once more that the form of reality is either that of a gigantic human body or of an unending series of cycles, and that the artist’s function is to achieve an epiphany of the former out of the chaos of nature and history. Here again is a work of art in which every letter as well as every word has been studied and put into its fit place, which is a puzzle to the intellectual powers and utter gibberish to the corporeal understanding. To all the symbols mentioned above there are many suggestive analogues in Blake, and a theory of symbolism broad enough to develop the critical and appreciative side of contemporary culture will almost have to draw heavily on him.

Blake’s doctrine of a single original language and religion implies that the similarities in ritual, myth and doctrine among all religions are more significant than their differences. It implies that a study of comparative religion, a morphology of myths, rituals and theologies, will lead us to a single visionary conception which the mind of man is trying to express, a vision of a created and fallen world which has been redeemed by a divine sacrifice and is proceeding to regeneration. In our day psychology and anthropology have worked great changes in our study of literature strongly suggestive of a development in this direction, and many of the symbols studied in the subconscious, the primitive and the hieratic minds are expanding into patterns of great comprehensiveness, the relevance of which to literary symbolism is not open to question. Anthropology tells us that the primitive imaginative gropings which take the forms of ceremonies and of myths invented to explain them show striking similarities all over the world. Psychology tells us that these ritual patterns have their counterpart in dreams elaborated by the subconscious. And whether we accept Blake’s conclusion or not, a less far-reaching inference is almost irresistible.

Neither the study of ritual nor of mythopoeic dreams takes us above a subconscious mental level, nor does such study, except in rare cases, attempt to suggest anything more than a subconscious unity among men. But if we can find such impressive archetypal forms emerging from sleeping or savage minds, it is surely possible that they would emerge more clearly from the concentrated visions of genius. These myths and dreams are crude art-forms, blurred and dim visions, rough drafts of the more accurate work of the artist. In time the communal myth precedes the individual one, but the latter focuses and clarifies the former, and when a work of art deals with a primitive myth, the essential meaning of that myth is not disguised, or sublimated, or refined, but revealed. A comparative study of dreams and rituals can lead us only to a vague and intuitive sense of the unity of the human mind; a comparative study of works of art should demonstrate it beyond conjecture. In the meantime, Blake’s Orc may help us to understand that a connection between sex and fire does not exist only in the fact that incendiarists are often sexual perverts, and Blake’s ghost of a flea may illustrate the fact that an identification of the character of an animal with the character of a human being does not exist only in totemism.

It is conceivable that such a study—the study of anagogy, if a name is wanted—would supply us with the missing piece in contemporary thought which, when supplied, will unite its whole pattern. Twentieth century culture has produced a large number of theories which seem to demand some kind of fitting together, and we have found a good many analogues to them in Blake. There are theories of history as a sequence of cultural organisms passing through certain stages of growth to a declining metropolitan phase which we are in now, as the Roman Empire was in it before us, which may remind us of Blake’s Orc cycle. There are at the same time theories of history as a sequence of revolutionary struggles proceeding toward a society completely free of both exploiters and their victims, which may remind us of Blake’s Seven Eyes. There are metaphysical theories of time, and of the divine as the concretion of a form in time, which may remind us of Blake’s Los. There are psychological theories of contending forces within the soul which may remind us of Blake’s Four Zoas. There are anthropological theories of a universal diffusion throughout primitive society of archetypal myths and rituals underlying all religion and art and connected chiefly with the cult of a dying and reviving god, which may remind us of Blake’s Druidism. There are scientific theories of the relativity of the physical world to its human perceivers, and of the mystery of the universe as the analytic aspect of its reality, which may remind us of Blake’s vision of Golgonooza. There are new formulations of the Christian conceptions of visionary understanding and of the recreation of the Word of God, new occult conceptions of creative imagination, and new cults with new historical and theological traditions, which have a resemblance to something in our poet. Besides all this, we now have certain facts about the social developments of “Deism” over a century which confirms a good deal of Blake’s analysis of them.

The combination of ignorance and lack of space has caused all this to be expressed very baldly, but it would not be honest to omit all mention of the obvious contemporary references of Blake’s thought, and in any case the professional caution of a lawyer is not for Blake’s interpreters. Now of course the critic’s task is to stimulate the understanding of his poet, not belief in what he says, and one naturally resents being told that Blake has “a message for our time.” That, however, is the precise opposite of the point we are trying to make. Blake once drew a “Visionary Head” of someone he called his “spiritual preceptor,” a vaguely Oriental-looking creature with an expression of baffling inscrutability<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn026" id="ch12fn-026">26</a></sup>; and any student of Blake may feel that he too is something of a “preceptor,” an oracular revealer of mysteries. But if the reader is left with the impression that there is, or that the writer thinks that there is, something uncanny about Blake’s insight, the whole purpose of this book, which is to establish Blake as a typical poet and his thinking as typically poetic thinking, will be overthrown. Anyone who accepts Blake as a preceptor will find his first precept to be that any poet whose work is on a big enough scale will yield an equal harvest of thought if we will take the trouble to learn something about the synthetic and concrete processes of the poetic mind.

The modern reader of Blake may amuse himself, as suggested above, by finding in Blake the germs of ideas later developed by so many of the most important thinkers of our day. In each case the propriety of comparing an exhaustive research into a subject with a few suggestive hints about it may be doubted: it is the poetic articulation, the imaginative unity, of Blake’s ideas that is important. Now Blake says that “Real Poets” have no competition<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn027" id="ch12fn-027">27</a></sup>: the primary impression which the real poet makes on the reader is not that of comparative greatness, but of positive goodness or genuineness. And this sense of genuineness is the unity of the positive impressions we receive. We are back at Blake’s doctrine that “Every Poem must necessarily be a perfect Unity,”<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn028" id="ch12fn-028">28</a></sup> with which we began. When we try to express the “quality” of a poem we usually refer to one of its attributes. Blake teaches us that a poem’s quality is its *whatness*, the unified pattern of its words and images.

A novelist can say “he ran like a rabbit” without involving the rabbit in a larger pattern of symbolism; but if he does indicate a central symbol, a scarlet letter, a white whale or a golden bowl, he forces us to consider his story as an imaginative unity. And at a certain pitch of concentration peripheral and random images begin to disappear: it has been shown by several critics of Shakespeare that there are very few images in the later plays without some thematic significance. And here the framework of archetypal symbolism provided by Blake may be of some value in trying to unify in our minds the symbolism of another poet. The student of Blake, reading Keats’s *Endymion*, may see in the pattern of its symbols, the moon, love, silver, water, sleep, night, dew, “eternal spring,” triple rhythms, and its drowsy, relaxed and rather feminine charm, a vision of the state of existence which Blake calls Beulah. He will be able to see how the themes of the elusive virgin, the young shepherd poet, the kingdom under the ocean, the “fabric crystalline” presided over by Circe, the escape from a watery world by exploring the “symbol-essences” of all forms and substances, and so on, fit together.<sup><a href="9781400847471_notes.xhtml#ch12fn029" id="ch12fn-029">29</a></sup> He will be able to see the relation of the world of *Endymion* to Spenser’s Gardens of Adonis and Bower of Bliss, and so understand how Keats interpreted and made use of Spenser. The meaning of a poem by Keats is not in Blake, it is in Keats: but it *is* in Keats, and a knowledge of Blake may make it easier to see it there. And after we have met an archetypal symbol employed by Blake, Keats and Spenser in a few more poets, a far bigger problem in interpretation begins to take shape, and here again we may find Blake of unique value as a vademecum.

Behind the pattern of images in poetry, however, is a pattern of words. In poetry the word is a complex of ideas and images, ambiguous and associative in meaning, synthetically apprehended. In ordinary speech the word is something much more blurred and commonplace. Even Blake’s favorite words “imagination” and “vision” are now rather tarnished, because so long used for the sentimental vagueness associated with them by vague and sentimental people. The point of view which Blake associates with Locke will attach still other meanings to them. But as the poet must use recognized words, his literary tact can go only so far: he cannot overcome a confirmed habit of responding only to words in their commonplace meanings. One can see this very clearly in translation. It is impossible that a Greek tragedian can have meant by *ananke* what the average English reader means by “necessity.” But the translator must use some word, and the real difficulty lies in the reader’s inability to recreate the word “necessity” into a conception with the associative richness of *ananke.* It has been said of Boehme that his books are like a picnic to which the author brings the words and the reader the meaning. The remark may have been intended as a sneer at Boehme, but it is an exact description of all works of literary art without exception.

Where are we to find the meanings of words? Sophocles is dead, and eke his language, and both at once are buried in dictionaries which give only the translator’s equivalent. The meaning of *ananke* must be sought in the meaning of the poetic form in which it is found, in the *raison d’être* of Greek tragedy. Here a knowledge of the historical origin and context of Greek tragedy is necessary, but we have explained why we must eventually move beyond this. Just as we must find the meaning of *ananke* in its relation to its context in Greek tragedy, so we must find the meaning of Greek tragedy in its relation to the context of all tragedy, the great drama of death and redemption of which it forms a crucial episode. Thus in pursuing the meaning of a word in poetry we follow the course of the meaning of the word “word” itself, which signifies the unit of meaning, the Scripture, and the Son of God and Man.

We have seen that in his relation to English literature Blake attaches himself to a certain unity of ideas held in the English Renaissance, most clearly illustrated in the first book of *The Faerie Queene* and *Areopagitica.* We traced this unity of ideas in the sixth chapter, and are now in a position to sum it up more briefly as the unity of the meanings belonging to “word” in the above paragraph. In its Renaissance context it was a combination of certain Protestant and humanist tendencies, of new ideas about the Word of God combined with new ideas about the words of man. If we understand that to Blake there are no puns or ambiguities or accidents in the range of the meaning of “word,” but a single and comprehensible form, we have wound up all of his golden string and are standing in front of his gate. But gates are to be opened, and there is still much to be seen by the light of the vision Blake saw—perhaps the same light that broke in on the dying Falstaff when he babbled of green fields and played with flowers, and on his hostess when she told how he had gone into “Arthur’s” bosom, and how he had talked of the Whore of Babylon.
