---
cena_id: 02_fisica/03_geracao_corrupcao/L01-C03_cena02
obra_pt: "Sobre a Geração e a Corrupção"
obra_en: "On Generation and Corruption"
categoria: 02_fisica
obra_slug: 03_geracao_corrupcao
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Joachim
livro_num: 1
livro_marker: "BOOK I"
capitulo_num: 3
capitulo_marker: "Part 3"
sub_cena_num: 2
sub_cena_total: 2
audio_in_obra_idx: 5
audio_in_obra_total: 26
chars: 7114
---

(i) Now we often divide terms into those which signify a 'this somewhat'
and those which do not. And (the first form of) the distinction, which
we are investigating, results from a similar division of terms: for
it makes a difference into what the changing thing changes. Perhaps,
e.g. the passage into Fire is 'coming-to-be' unqualified, but 'passingaway-of-something'
(e.g. Earth): whilst the coming-to-be of Earth is qualified (not unqualified)
'coming-to-be', though unqualified 'passing-away' (e.g. of Fire).
This would be the case on the theory set forth in Parmenides: for
he says that the things into which change takes place are two, and
he asserts that these two, viz. what is and what is not, are Fire
and Earth. Whether we postulate these, or other things of a similar
kind, makes no difference. For we are trying to discover not what
undergoes these changes, but what is their characteristic manner.
The passage, then, into what 'is' not except with a qualification
is unqualified passing-away, while the passage into what 'is' without
qualification is unqualified coming-to-be. Hence whatever the contrasted
'poles' of the changes may be whether Fire and Earth, or some other
couple-the one of them will be 'a being' and the other 'a not-being'.

We have thus stated one characteristic manner in which unqualified
will be distinguished from qualified coming-to-be and passing-away:
but they are also distinguished according to the special nature of
the material of the changing thing. For a material, whose constitutive
differences signify more a 'this somewhat', is itself more 'substantial'
or 'real': while a material, whose constitutive differences signify
privation, is 'not real'. (Suppose, e.g. that 'the hot' is a positive
predication, i.e. a 'form', whereas 'cold' is a privation, and that
Earth and Fire differ from one another by these constitutive differences.)

The opinion, however, which most people are inclined to prefer, is
that the distinction depends upon the difference between 'the perceptible'
and 'the imperceptible'. Thus, when there is a change into perceptible
material, people say there is 'coming-to-be'; but when there is a
change into invisible material, they call it 'passing-away'. For they
distinguish 'what is' and 'what is not' by their perceiving and not-perceiving,
just as what is knowable 'is' and what is unknowable 'is not'-perception
on their view having the force of knowledge. Hence, just as they deem
themselves to live and to 'be' in virtue of their perceiving or their
capacity to perceive, so too they deem the things to 'be' qua perceived
or perceptible-and in this they are in a sense on the track of the
truth, though what they actually say is not true. 

Thus unqualified coming-to-be and passingaway turn out to be different
according to common opinion from what they are in truth. For Wind
and Air are in truth more real more a 'this somewhat' or a 'form'-than
Earth. But they are less real to perception which explains why things
are commonly said to 'pass-away' without qualification when they change
into Wind and Air, and to 'come-to-be' when they change into what
is tangible, i.e. into Earth. 

We have now explained why there is 'unqualified coming-to-be' (though
it is a passingaway-of-something) and 'unqualified passingaway (though
it is a coming-to-be-of-something). For this distinction of appellation
depends upon a difference in the material out of which, and into which,
the changes are effected. It depends either upon whether the material
is or is not 'substantial', or upon whether it is more or less 'substantial',
or upon whether it is more or less perceptible. 

(ii) But why are some things said to 'come to-be' without qualification,
and others only to 'come-to-be-so-and-so', in cases different from
the one we have been considering where two things come-to-be reciprocally
out of one another? For at present we have explained no more than
this:-why, when two things change reciprocally into one another, we
do not attribute coming-to-be and passing-away uniformly to them both,
although every coming-to-be is a passing-away of something else and
every passing-away some other thing's coming-to-be. But the question
subsequently formulated involves a different problem-viz. why, although
the learning thing is said to 'come-to-be-learned' but not to 'come-tobe'
without qualification, yet the growing thing is said to 'come-to-be'.

The distinction here turns upon the difference of the Categories.
For some things signify a this somewhat, others a such, and others
a so-much. Those things, then, which do not signify substance, are
not said to 'come-to-be' without qualification, but only to 'come-to-be-so-and-so'.
Nevertheless, in all changing things alike, we speak of 'coming-to-be'
when the thing comes-to-be something in one of the two Columns-e.g.
in Substance, if it comes-to-be Fire but not if it comes-to-be Earth;
and in Quality, if it comes-to-be learned but not when it comes-to-be
ignorant. 

We have explained why some things come to-be without qualification,
but not others both in general, and also when the changing things
are substances and nothing else; and we have stated that the substratum
is the material cause of the continuous occurrence of coming to-be,
because it is such as to change from contrary to contrary and because,
in substances, the coming-to-be of one thing is always a passing-away
of another, and the passing-away of one thing is always another's
coming-to-be. But there is no need even to discuss the other question
we raised-viz. why coming-to-be continues though things are constantly
being destroyed. For just as people speak of 'a passing-away' without
qualification when a thing has passed into what is imperceptible and
what in that sense 'is not', so also they speak of 'a coming-to-be
out of a not-being' when a thing emerges from an imperceptible. Whether,
therefore, the substratum is or is not something, what comes-tobe
emerges out of a 'not-being': so that a thing comes-to-be out of a
not-being' just as much as it 'passes-away into what is not'. Hence
it is reasonable enough that coming-to-be should never fail. For coming-to-be
is a passing-away of 'what is not' and passing-away is a coming to-be
of 'what is not'. 

But what about that which 'is' not except with a qualification? Is
it one of the two contrary poles of the chang-e.g. Earth (i.e. the
heavy) a 'not-being', but Fire (i.e. the light) a 'being'? Or, on
the contrary, does what is 'include Earth as well as Fire, whereas
what is not' is matter-the matter of Earth and Fire alike? And again,
is the matter of each different? Or is it the same, since otherwise
they would not come-to-be reciprocally out of one another, i.e. contraries
out of contraries? For these things-Fire, Earth, Water, Air-are characterized
by 'the contraries'. 

Perhaps the solution is that their matter is in one sense the same,
but in another sense different. For that which underlies them, whatever
its nature may be qua underlying them, is the same: but its actual
being is not the same. So much, then, on these topics.
