---
cena_id: 01_organon/01_categorias/L01-C05_cena02
obra_pt: "Categorias"
obra_en: "Categories"
categoria: 01_organon
obra_slug: 01_categorias
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Edghill
livro_num: 1
livro_marker: "SECTION 1"
capitulo_num: 5
capitulo_marker: "Part 5"
sub_cena_num: 2
sub_cena_total: 2
audio_in_obra_idx: 6
audio_in_obra_total: 19
chars: 7440
---

It is the mark of substances and of differentiae that, in all propositions
of which they form the predicate, they are predicated univocally.
For all such propositions have for their subject either the individual
or the species. It is true that, inasmuch as primary substance is
not predicable of anything, it can never form the predicate of any
proposition. But of secondary substances, the species is predicated
of the individual, the genus both of the species and of the individual.
Similarly the differentiae are predicated of the species and of the
individuals. Moreover, the definition of the species and that of the
genus are applicable to the primary substance, and that of the genus
to the species. For all that is predicated of the predicate will be
predicated also of the subject. Similarly, the definition of the differentiae
will be applicable to the species and to the individuals. But it was
stated above that the word 'univocal' was applied to those things
which had both name and definition in common. It is, therefore, established
that in every proposition, of which either substance or a differentia
forms the predicate, these are predicated univocally. 

All substance appears to signify that which is individual. In the
case of primary substance this is indisputably true, for the thing
is a unit. In the case of secondary substances, when we speak, for
instance, of 'man' or 'animal', our form of speech gives the impression
that we are here also indicating that which is individual, but the
impression is not strictly true; for a secondary substance is not
an individual, but a class with a certain qualification; for it is
not one and single as a primary substance is; the words 'man', 'animal',
are predicable of more than one subject. 

Yet species and genus do not merely indicate quality, like the term
'white'; 'white' indicates quality and nothing further, but species
and genus determine the quality with reference to a substance: they
signify substance qualitatively differentiated. The determinate qualification
covers a larger field in the case of the genus that in that of the
species: he who uses the word 'animal' is herein using a word of wider
extension than he who uses the word 'man'. 

Another mark of substance is that it has no contrary. What could be
the contrary of any primary substance, such as the individual man
or animal? It has none. Nor can the species or the genus have a contrary.
Yet this characteristic is not peculiar to substance, but is true
of many other things, such as quantity. There is nothing that forms
the contrary of 'two cubits long' or of 'three cubits long', or of
'ten', or of any such term. A man may contend that 'much' is the contrary
of 'little', or 'great' of 'small', but of definite quantitative terms
no contrary exists. 

Substance, again, does not appear to admit of variation of degree.
I do not mean by this that one substance cannot be more or less truly
substance than another, for it has already been stated' that this
is the case; but that no single substance admits of varying degrees
within itself. For instance, one particular substance, 'man', cannot
be more or less man either than himself at some other time or than
some other man. One man cannot be more man than another, as that which
is white may be more or less white than some other white object, or
as that which is beautiful may be more or less beautiful than some
other beautiful object. The same quality, moreover, is said to subsist
in a thing in varying degrees at different times. A body, being white,
is said to be whiter at one time than it was before, or, being warm,
is said to be warmer or less warm than at some other time. But substance
is not said to be more or less that which it is: a man is not more
truly a man at one time than he was before, nor is anything, if it
is substance, more or less what it is. Substance, then, does not admit
of variation of degree. 

The most distinctive mark of substance appears to be that, while remaining
numerically one and the same, it is capable of admitting contrary
qualities. From among things other than substance, we should find
ourselves unable to bring forward any which possessed this mark. Thus,
one and the same colour cannot be white and black. Nor can the same
one action be good and bad: this law holds good with everything that
is not substance. But one and the selfsame substance, while retaining
its identity, is yet capable of admitting contrary qualities. The
same individual person is at one time white, at another black, at
one time warm, at another cold, at one time good, at another bad.
This capacity is found nowhere else, though it might be maintained
that a statement or opinion was an exception to the rule. The same
statement, it is agreed, can be both true and false. For if the statement
'he is sitting' is true, yet, when the person in question has risen,
the same statement will be false. The same applies to opinions. For
if any one thinks truly that a person is sitting, yet, when that person
has risen, this same opinion, if still held, will be false. Yet although
this exception may be allowed, there is, nevertheless, a difference
in the manner in which the thing takes place. It is by themselves
changing that substances admit contrary qualities. It is thus that
that which was hot becomes cold, for it has entered into a different
state. Similarly that which was white becomes black, and that which
was bad good, by a process of change; and in the same way in all other
cases it is by changing that substances are capable of admitting contrary
qualities. But statements and opinions themselves remain unaltered
in all respects: it is by the alteration in the facts of the case
that the contrary quality comes to be theirs. The statement 'he is
sitting' remains unaltered, but it is at one time true, at another
false, according to circumstances. What has been said of statements
applies also to opinions. Thus, in respect of the manner in which
the thing takes place, it is the peculiar mark of substance that it
should be capable of admitting contrary qualities; for it is by itself
changing that it does so. 

If, then, a man should make this exception and contend that statements
and opinions are capable of admitting contrary qualities, his contention
is unsound. For statements and opinions are said to have this capacity,
not because they themselves undergo modification, but because this
modification occurs in the case of something else. The truth or falsity
of a statement depends on facts, and not on any power on the part
of the statement itself of admitting contrary qualities. In short,
there is nothing which can alter the nature of statements and opinions.
As, then, no change takes place in themselves, these cannot be said
to be capable of admitting contrary qualities. 

But it is by reason of the modification which takes place within the
substance itself that a substance is said to be capable of admitting
contrary qualities; for a substance admits within itself either disease
or health, whiteness or blackness. It is in this sense that it is
said to be capable of admitting contrary qualities. 

To sum up, it is a distinctive mark of substance, that, while remaining
numerically one and the same, it is capable of admitting contrary
qualities, the modification taking place through a change in the substance
itself. 

Let these remarks suffice on the subject of substance.
