---
cena_id: 01_organon/01_categorias/L01-C05_cena01
obra_pt: "Categorias"
obra_en: "Categories"
categoria: 01_organon
obra_slug: 01_categorias
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Edghill
livro_num: 1
livro_marker: "SECTION 1"
capitulo_num: 5
capitulo_marker: "Part 5"
sub_cena_num: 1
sub_cena_total: 2
audio_in_obra_idx: 5
audio_in_obra_total: 19
chars: 7284
---

Substance, in the truest and primary and most definite sense of the
word, is that which is neither predicable of a subject nor present
in a subject; for instance, the individual man or horse. But in a
secondary sense those things are called substances within which, as
species, the primary substances are included; also those which, as
genera, include the species. For instance, the individual man is included
in the species 'man', and the genus to which the species belongs is
'animal'; these, therefore-that is to say, the species 'man' and the
genus 'animal,-are termed secondary substances. 

It is plain from what has been said that both the name and the definition
of the predicate must be predicable of the subject. For instance,
'man' is predicted of the individual man. Now in this case the name
of the species man' is applied to the individual, for we use the term
'man' in describing the individual; and the definition of 'man' will
also be predicated of the individual man, for the individual man is
both man and animal. Thus, both the name and the definition of the
species are predicable of the individual. 

With regard, on the other hand, to those things which are present
in a subject, it is generally the case that neither their name nor
their definition is predicable of that in which they are present.
Though, however, the definition is never predicable, there is nothing
in certain cases to prevent the name being used. For instance, 'white'
being present in a body is predicated of that in which it is present,
for a body is called white: the definition, however, of the colour
white' is never predicable of the body. 

Everything except primary substances is either predicable of a primary
substance or present in a primary substance. This becomes evident
by reference to particular instances which occur. 'Animal' is predicated
of the species 'man', therefore of the individual man, for if there
were no individual man of whom it could be predicated, it could not
be predicated of the species 'man' at all. Again, colour is present
in body, therefore in individual bodies, for if there were no individual
body in which it was present, it could not be present in body at all.
Thus everything except primary substances is either predicated of
primary substances, or is present in them, and if these last did not
exist, it would be impossible for anything else to exist.

Of secondary substances, the species is more truly substance than
the genus, being more nearly related to primary substance. For if
any one should render an account of what a primary substance is, he
would render a more instructive account, and one more proper to the
subject, by stating the species than by stating the genus. Thus, he
would give a more instructive account of an individual man by stating
that he was man than by stating that he was animal, for the former
description is peculiar to the individual in a greater degree, while
the latter is too general. Again, the man who gives an account of
the nature of an individual tree will give a more instructive account
by mentioning the species 'tree' than by mentioning the genus 'plant'.

Moreover, primary substances are most properly called substances in
virtue of the fact that they are the entities which underlie every.
else, and that everything else is either predicated of them or present
in them. Now the same relation which subsists between primary substance
and everything else subsists also between the species and the genus:
for the species is to the genus as subject is to predicate, since
the genus is predicated of the species, whereas the species cannot
be predicated of the genus. Thus we have a second ground for asserting
that the species is more truly substance than the genus.

Of species themselves, except in the case of such as are genera, no
one is more truly substance than another. We should not give a more
appropriate account of the individual man by stating the species to
which he belonged, than we should of an individual horse by adopting
the same method of definition. In the same way, of primary substances,
no one is more truly substance than another; an individual man is
not more truly substance than an individual ox. 

It is, then, with good reason that of all that remains, when we exclude
primary substances, we concede to species and genera alone the name
'secondary substance', for these alone of all the predicates convey
a knowledge of primary substance. For it is by stating the species
or the genus that we appropriately define any individual man; and
we shall make our definition more exact by stating the former than
by stating the latter. All other things that we state, such as that
he is white, that he runs, and so on, are irrelevant to the definition.
Thus it is just that these alone, apart from primary substances, should
be called substances. 

Further, primary substances are most properly so called, because they
underlie and are the subjects of everything else. Now the same relation
that subsists between primary substance and everything else subsists
also between the species and the genus to which the primary substance
belongs, on the one hand, and every attribute which is not included
within these, on the other. For these are the subjects of all such.
If we call an individual man 'skilled in grammar', the predicate is
applicable also to the species and to the genus to which he belongs.
This law holds good in all cases. 

It is a common characteristic of all sub. stance that it is never
present in a subject. For primary substance is neither present in
a subject nor predicated of a subject; while, with regard to secondary
substances, it is clear from the following arguments (apart from others)
that they are not present in a subject. For 'man' is predicated of
the individual man, but is not present in any subject: for manhood
is not present in the individual man. In the same way, 'animal' is
also predicated of the individual man, but is not present in him.
Again, when a thing is present in a subject, though the name may quite
well be applied to that in which it is present, the definition cannot
be applied. Yet of secondary substances, not only the name, but also
the definition, applies to the subject: we should use both the definition
of the species and that of the genus with reference to the individual
man. Thus substance cannot be present in a subject. 

Yet this is not peculiar to substance, for it is also the case that
differentiae cannot be present in subjects. The characteristics 'terrestrial'
and 'two-footed' are predicated of the species 'man', but not present
in it. For they are not in man. Moreover, the definition of the differentia
may be predicated of that of which the differentia itself is predicated.
For instance, if the characteristic 'terrestrial' is predicated of
the species 'man', the definition also of that characteristic may
be used to form the predicate of the species 'man': for 'man' is terrestrial.

The fact that the parts of substances appear to be present in the
whole, as in a subject, should not make us apprehensive lest we should
have to admit that such parts are not substances: for in explaining
the phrase 'being present in a subject', we stated' that we meant
'otherwise than as parts in a whole'.
