---
cena_id: 01_organon/01_categorias/L02-C08_cena01
obra_pt: "Categorias"
obra_en: "Categories"
categoria: 01_organon
obra_slug: 01_categorias
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Edghill
livro_num: 2
livro_marker: "SECTION 2"
capitulo_num: 8
capitulo_marker: "Part 8"
sub_cena_num: 1
sub_cena_total: 2
audio_in_obra_idx: 10
audio_in_obra_total: 19
chars: 7919
---

By 'quality' I mean that in virtue of which people are said to be
such and such. 

Quality is a term that is used in many senses. One sort of quality
let us call 'habit' or 'disposition'. Habit differs from disposition
in being more lasting and more firmly established. The various kinds
of knowledge and of virtue are habits, for knowledge, even when acquired
only in a moderate degree, is, it is agreed, abiding in its character
and difficult to displace, unless some great mental upheaval takes
place, through disease or any such cause. The virtues, also, such
as justice, self-restraint, and so on, are not easily dislodged or
dismissed, so as to give place to vice. 

By a disposition, on the other hand, we mean a condition that is easily
changed and quickly gives place to its opposite. Thus, heat, cold,
disease, health, and so on are dispositions. For a man is disposed
in one way or another with reference to these, but quickly changes,
becoming cold instead of warm, ill instead of well. So it is with
all other dispositions also, unless through lapse of time a disposition
has itself become inveterate and almost impossible to dislodge: in
which case we should perhaps go so far as to call it a habit.

It is evident that men incline to call those conditions habits which
are of a more or less permanent type and difficult to displace; for
those who are not retentive of knowledge, but volatile, are not said
to have such and such a 'habit' as regards knowledge, yet they are
disposed, we may say, either better or worse, towards knowledge. Thus
habit differs from disposition in this, that while the latter in ephemeral,
the former is permanent and difficult to alter. 

Habits are at the same time dispositions, but dispositions are not
necessarily habits. For those who have some specific habit may be
said also, in virtue of that habit, to be thus or thus disposed; but
those who are disposed in some specific way have not in all cases
the corresponding habit. 

Another sort of quality is that in virtue of which, for example, we
call men good boxers or runners, or healthy or sickly: in fact it
includes all those terms which refer to inborn capacity or incapacity.
Such things are not predicated of a person in virtue of his disposition,
but in virtue of his inborn capacity or incapacity to do something
with ease or to avoid defeat of any kind. Persons are called good
boxers or good runners, not in virtue of such and such a disposition,
but in virtue of an inborn capacity to accomplish something with ease.
Men are called healthy in virtue of the inborn capacity of easy resistance
to those unhealthy influences that may ordinarily arise; unhealthy,
in virtue of the lack of this capacity. Similarly with regard to softness
and hardness. Hardness is predicated of a thing because it has that
capacity of resistance which enables it to withstand disintegration;
softness, again, is predicated of a thing by reason of the lack of
that capacity. 

A third class within this category is that of affective qualities
and affections. Sweetness, bitterness, sourness, are examples of this
sort of quality, together with all that is akin to these; heat, moreover,
and cold, whiteness, and blackness are affective qualities. It is
evident that these are qualities, for those things that possess them
are themselves said to be such and such by reason of their presence.
Honey is called sweet because it contains sweetness; the body is called
white because it contains whiteness; and so in all other cases.

The term 'affective quality' is not used as indicating that those
things which admit these qualities are affected in any way. Honey
is not called sweet because it is affected in a specific way, nor
is this what is meant in any other instance. Similarly heat and cold
are called affective qualities, not because those things which admit
them are affected. What is meant is that these said qualities are
capable of producing an 'affection' in the way of perception. For
sweetness has the power of affecting the sense of taste; heat, that
of touch; and so it is with the rest of these qualities.

Whiteness and blackness, however, and the other colours, are not said
to be affective qualities in this sense, but -because they themselves
are the results of an affection. It is plain that many changes of
colour take place because of affections. When a man is ashamed, he
blushes; when he is afraid, he becomes pale, and so on. So true is
this, that when a man is by nature liable to such affections, arising
from some concomitance of elements in his constitution, it is a probable
inference that he has the corresponding complexion of skin. For the
same disposition of bodily elements, which in the former instance
was momentarily present in the case of an access of shame, might be
a result of a man's natural temperament, so as to produce the corresponding
colouring also as a natural characteristic. All conditions, therefore,
of this kind, if caused by certain permanent and lasting affections,
are called affective qualities. For pallor and duskiness of complexion
are called qualities, inasmuch as we are said to be such and such
in virtue of them, not only if they originate in natural constitution,
but also if they come about through long disease or sunburn, and are
difficult to remove, or indeed remain throughout life. For in the
same way we are said to be such and such because of these.

Those conditions, however, which arise from causes which may easily
be rendered ineffective or speedily removed, are called, not qualities,
but affections: for we are not said to be such virtue of them. The
man who blushes through shame is not said to be a constitutional blusher,
nor is the man who becomes pale through fear said to be constitutionally
pale. He is said rather to have been affected. 

Thus such conditions are called affections, not qualities.

In like manner there are affective qualities and affections of the
soul. That temper with which a man is born and which has its origin
in certain deep-seated affections is called a quality. I mean such
conditions as insanity, irascibility, and so on: for people are said
to be mad or irascible in virtue of these. Similarly those abnormal
psychic states which are not inborn, but arise from the concomitance
of certain other elements, and are difficult to remove, or altogether
permanent, are called qualities, for in virtue of them men are said
to be such and such. 

Those, however, which arise from causes easily rendered ineffective
are called affections, not qualities. Suppose that a man is irritable
when vexed: he is not even spoken of as a bad-tempered man, when in
such circumstances he loses his temper somewhat, but rather is said
to be affected. Such conditions are therefore termed, not qualities,
but affections. 

The fourth sort of quality is figure and the shape that belongs to
a thing; and besides this, straightness and curvedness and any other
qualities of this type; each of these defines a thing as being such
and such. Because it is triangular or quadrangular a thing is said
to have a specific character, or again because it is straight or curved;
in fact a thing's shape in every case gives rise to a qualification
of it. 

Rarity and density, roughness and smoothness, seem to be terms indicating
quality: yet these, it would appear, really belong to a class different
from that of quality. For it is rather a certain relative position
of the parts composing the thing thus qualified which, it appears,
is indicated by each of these terms. A thing is dense, owing to the
fact that its parts are closely combined with one another; rare, because
there are interstices between the parts; smooth, because its parts
lie, so to speak, evenly; rough, because some parts project beyond
others. 

There may be other sorts of quality, but those that are most properly
so called have, we may safely say, been enumerated.
