---
cena_id: 01_organon/01_categorias/L03-C10_cena02
obra_pt: "Categorias"
obra_en: "Categories"
categoria: 01_organon
obra_slug: 01_categorias
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Edghill
livro_num: 3
livro_marker: "SECTION 3"
capitulo_num: 10
capitulo_marker: "Part 10"
sub_cena_num: 2
sub_cena_total: 2
audio_in_obra_idx: 14
audio_in_obra_total: 19
chars: 7042
---

That those terms which fall under the heads of 'positives' and 'privatives'
are not opposed each to each as contraries, either, is plain from
the following facts: Of a pair of contraries such that they have no
intermediate, one or the other must needs be present in the subject
in which they naturally subsist, or of which they are predicated;
for it is those, as we proved,' in the case of which this necessity
obtains, that have no intermediate. Moreover, we cited health and
disease, odd and even, as instances. But those contraries which have
an intermediate are not subject to any such necessity. It is not necessary
that every substance, receptive of such qualities, should be either
black or white, cold or hot, for something intermediate between these
contraries may very well be present in the subject. We proved, moreover,
that those contraries have an intermediate in the case of which the
said necessity does not obtain. Yet when one of the two contraries
is a constitutive property of the subject, as it is a constitutive
property of fire to be hot, of snow to be white, it is necessary determinately
that one of the two contraries, not one or the other, should be present
in the subject; for fire cannot be cold, or snow black. Thus, it is
not the case here that one of the two must needs be present in every
subject receptive of these qualities, but only in that subject of
which the one forms a constitutive property. Moreover, in such cases
it is one member of the pair determinately, and not either the one
or the other, which must be present. 

In the case of 'positives' and 'privatives', on the other hand, neither
of the aforesaid statements holds good. For it is not necessary that
a subject receptive of the qualities should always have either the
one or the other; that which has not yet advanced to the state when
sight is natural is not said either to be blind or to see. Thus 'positives'
and 'privatives' do not belong to that class of contraries which consists
of those which have no intermediate. On the other hand, they do not
belong either to that class which consists of contraries which have
an intermediate. For under certain conditions it is necessary that
either the one or the other should form part of the constitution of
every appropriate subject. For when a thing has reached the stage
when it is by nature capable of sight, it will be said either to see
or to be blind, and that in an indeterminate sense, signifying that
the capacity may be either present or absent; for it is not necessary
either that it should see or that it should be blind, but that it
should be either in the one state or in the other. Yet in the case
of those contraries which have an intermediate we found that it was
never necessary that either the one or the other should be present
in every appropriate subject, but only that in certain subjects one
of the pair should be present, and that in a determinate sense. It
is, therefore, plain that 'positives' and 'privatives' are not opposed
each to each in either of the senses in which contraries are opposed.

Again, in the case of contraries, it is possible that there should
be changes from either into the other, while the subject retains its
identity, unless indeed one of the contraries is a constitutive property
of that subject, as heat is of fire. For it is possible that that
that which is healthy should become diseased, that which is white,
black, that which is cold, hot, that which is good, bad, that which
is bad, good. The bad man, if he is being brought into a better way
of life and thought, may make some advance, however slight, and if
he should once improve, even ever so little, it is plain that he might
change completely, or at any rate make very great progress; for a
man becomes more and more easily moved to virtue, however small the
improvement was at first. It is, therefore, natural to suppose that
he will make yet greater progress than he has made in the past; and
as this process goes on, it will change him completely and establish
him in the contrary state, provided he is not hindered by lack of
time. In the case of 'positives' and 'privatives', however, change
in both directions is impossible. There may be a change from possession
to privation, but not from privation to possession. The man who has
become blind does not regain his sight; the man who has become bald
does not regain his hair; the man who has lost his teeth does not
grow his grow a new set. (iv) Statements opposed as affirmation and
negation belong manifestly to a class which is distinct, for in this
case, and in this case only, it is necessary for the one opposite
to be true and the other false. 

Neither in the case of contraries, nor in the case of correlatives,
nor in the case of 'positives' and 'privatives', is it necessary for
one to be true and the other false. Health and disease are contraries:
neither of them is true or false. 'Double' and 'half' are opposed
to each other as correlatives: neither of them is true or false. The
case is the same, of course, with regard to 'positives' and 'privatives'
such as 'sight' and 'blindness'. In short, where there is no sort
of combination of words, truth and falsity have no place, and all
the opposites we have mentioned so far consist of simple words.

At the same time, when the words which enter into opposed statements
are contraries, these, more than any other set of opposites, would
seem to claim this characteristic. 'Socrates is ill' is the contrary
of 'Socrates is well', but not even of such composite expressions
is it true to say that one of the pair must always be true and the
other false. For if Socrates exists, one will be true and the other
false, but if he does not exist, both will be false; for neither 'Socrates
is ill' nor 'Socrates is well' is true, if Socrates does not exist
at all. 

In the case of 'positives' and 'privatives', if the subject does not
exist at all, neither proposition is true, but even if the subject
exists, it is not always the fact that one is true and the other false.
For 'Socrates has sight' is the opposite of 'Socrates is blind' in
the sense of the word 'opposite' which applies to possession and privation.
Now if Socrates exists, it is not necessary that one should be true
and the other false, for when he is not yet able to acquire the power
of vision, both are false, as also if Socrates is altogether non-existent.

But in the case of affirmation and negation, whether the subject exists
or not, one is always false and the other true. For manifestly, if
Socrates exists, one of the two propositions 'Socrates is ill', 'Socrates
is not ill', is true, and the other false. This is likewise the case
if he does not exist; for if he does not exist, to say that he is
ill is false, to say that he is not ill is true. Thus it is in the
case of those opposites only, which are opposite in the sense in which
the term is used with reference to affirmation and negation, that
the rule holds good, that one of the pair must be true and the other
false.
