| 19 | *THE RHYTHM OF CONTINUITY: PROSE* |
|---|---|

THE RHYTHM OF CONTINUITY: PROSE

In every poem we can hear at least two distinct rhythms. One is the recurring rhythm, which we have shown to be a complex of accent, metre, and sound-pattern. The other is the semantic rhythm of sense, or what is usually felt to be the prose rhythm. Exaggerating the former, in speaking poetry aloud, will produce sing-song; exaggerating the latter will produce “insanely pompous prose,” to quote a remark of Bernard Shaw on the speaking of Shakespeare in his day. We have verse *epos* when the recurrent rhythm is the primary or organizing one, and prose when the semantic rhythm is primary. Literary prose results from the use within literature of the form used for discursive or assertive writing. Treatises in verse, however “unpoetical,” are invariably classified as literary.

The sixteenth century was a period of experiment, mainly in verse *epos* or running rhythm, to use Hopkins’s term. The influence of *melos* developed blank verse; the influence of *opsis* the Spenserian stanza and Drayton’s hexameter (the fact that *Polyolbion* is a descriptive poem may account for Drayton’s choice of this metre). As in all experimental periods, there were some comparative failures, such as poulterer’s measure, which had a vogue and were then dropped. Prose *epos*, that is, prose which is conceived primarily as oratorical prose, reflects the cultural domination of *epos:* it is normally thought of as a subsidiary form of spoken expression, of which the highest form is verse. It is assigned to the low or at best the middle style, such metaphors as Milton’s “sitting here below in the cool element of prose” being typical. Hence any attempt to give literary dignity to prose is likely to give it some of the characteristics of verse.

Jeremy Bentham is reputed to have distinguished prose from verse by the fact that in prose all the lines run to the end of the page. Like many simple-minded observations, this has a truth that the myopia of knowledgeability is more apt to overlook. The rhythm of prose is continuous, not recurrent, and the fact is symbolized by the purely mechanical breaking of prose lines on a printed page. Of course every prose writer knows that the writing of prose is not as mechanical as the printing of it, and that it is possible for printing to injure or even spoil the rhythm of a sentence by putting an emphatic word at the end of a line instead of at the beginning of the next one, by hyphenating a strongly stressed word, and so on. But the prose writer is largely the prisoner of his luck, unless he is willing to make the kind of revolt against luck illustrated by Mallarmé’s *Coup des Dés*. The characteristics of Renaissance oratorical prose, with the many recurrent features in its rhythm, are often concealed by the continuous printing of typography. The antiphonal chant in which the character books are written is a good example.

He distastes religion as a sad thing,

and is six years elder for a thought of heaven.

He scorns and fears, and yet hopes for old age,

but dare not imagine it with wrinkles …

He offers you his blood today in kindness,

and is ready to take yours tomorrow.

He does seldom anything which he wishes not to do again,

and is only wise after a misfortune …

Euphuism, again, employs every device known to the rhetoric books, including rhyme, metrical balance, and alliteration, which are usually thought of as the prerogative of verse. Ciceronian prose was based on a periodic rhythm and a balancing of clauses that was often a quasi-metrical balance. In prose works which are deliberate rhetorical exercises, such as Browne’s *Urn Burial*, one can pick out recurring units of rhythm like the *clausulae* of Cicero: “handsome enclosure in glasses,” “revengeful contentions of Rome,” are anapestic examples. The 1611 Bible is frequently printed with each verse a separate paragraph: this is doubtless done primarily for the convenience of preachers, but it also gives a clearer idea of its prose rhythm than conventionally printed prose would do. The rhythm of some of Bacon’s essays, especially the earlier and more aphoristic ones, would also emerge more clearly if each sentence were a separate paragraph.

By the seventeenth century the period of experiment in running rhythm had run its course, and a period of experiment in prose succeeded. This begins with the <a href="#13_notes.xhtml_fn-71" id="11_ch04.xhtml_fn71">“Senecan amble”</a> or Attic prose, the revolt in the direction of a natural speaking style against the formal half-metrical rhetoric of the Ciceronians. In Dryden the emancipating of prose from the domination of metre and the liberating of the distinctive semantic rhythm of prose is an accomplished fact. Thus Matthew Arnold was right in calling the period of Dryden and Pope an age of prose and reason, not because its poetry is prosaic, but because its prose is fully realized prose. One of the curious facts of literary history is that M. Jourdain’s celebrated discovery in fact *is* a discovery, and one that a literature seems most often to make at a well advanced point in its development.

In saying that the distinctive rhythm of prose emerges more clearly from Dryden’s time on, we are not, of course, saying that *better* prose was then written, though perhaps the reader needs no further warnings against premature value-judgements. But it becomes obvious that prose by itself is a transparent medium: it is at its purest—that is, at its furthest from *epos* and other metrical influences—when it is least obtrusive and presents its subject-matter like plate glass in a shop window. It goes without saying that such neutral clarity is far from dullness, as dullness is invariably opaque. Hence, while there is no *literary* reason why prose should not be as rhetorical as the writer pleases, rhetorical prose often becomes a disadvantage when prose is used for non-literary purposes. Something of this is expressed by the remark that it is impossible to tell the truth in Macaulay’s style—not that Macaulay is the best writer to attach the remark to. A highly mannered prose is not sufficiently flexible to do the purely descriptive work of prose: it continually oversimplifies and over-symmetrizes its material. Even Gibbon is not above sacrificing a necessary qualification of a fact to an antithesis. Something of the same principle can be seen within literature itself: in studying the euphuist romances, for example, one becomes aware of how difficult it is to get a story told in euphuist prose. Euphuism grew out of oratorical forms, and remains best adapted to harangue: the euphuist writer seizes every chance for relapsing into monologue that he can get.

Rhetorical prose, in short, is naturally best adapted to the two purposes of rhetoric, ornament and persuasion. But as these two purposes are a psychological contrast, persuasive prose is often neutralized in its effect by the very ornament that makes it delightfully persuasive. The beauty of Jeremy Taylor’s devotional writing is a disinterested factor in it which has kept him in the permanent confines of literature instead of in the transient stream of kinetic persuasion. The principle involved is by no means confined to Taylor: even in the Anglo-Saxon congregation of <a href="#13_notes.xhtml_fn-72" id="11_ch04.xhtml_fn72">Wulfstan</a> there must have been a few secular-minded highbrows who were thinking less of their sins than of the preacher’s mastery of alliterative rhythm:

Her syndan mannslagan ond maegslagan ond maesserbanan ond mynsterhatan, ond her syndan mansworan ond morthorwyrhtan, ond her syndan myltestran ond bearnmyrthran ond fule forlegene horingas manege, ond her syndan wiccan ond waelcyrian, ond her syndan ryperas ond reaferas ond worolstruderas, ond, hraedest is to cwethenne, mana ond misdaeda ungerim ealra.

We are concerned here with literary prose: an account of non-literary prose rhythm will be given later in the essay. A tendency to long sentences made up of short phrases and coordinate clauses, to emphatic repetition combined with a driving linear rhythm, to invective, to exhaustive catalogues, and to expressing the process or movement of thought instead of the logical word-order of achieved thought, are among the signs of prose *melos*. Rabelais is one of the greatest masters of *melos* in prose: the wonderful drinking party in the fifth chapter of the first book seems to me to be technically musical, Jannequin set to words, so to speak. In English we have Burton, who is said to have amused himself by going down to the Isis and listening to the bargemen swear. Perhaps his visits were professional, for the qualities of his style are essentially the qualities of good swearing: a swinging sense of rhythm, a love of invective and of catalogue, an unlimited vocabulary, a tendency to think in short accentual units, and an encyclopaedic knowledge of the two subjects relevant to swearing, theology and personal hygiene. All of these except the last are musical characteristics.

The prose of Milton, like his verse, is at its best full of “true musical delight,” though of course of a very different kind. The enormous periodic sentences with their short barking phrases, the variations of speed within these sentences, the rhetorical accumulation of emotionally charged epithets, the roaring Beethovenish-coda perorations, are some of its features. Sterne, however, is the chief master of prose *melos* before the development of “stream of consciousness” techniques for presenting thought as a process revived it in our own day. In Proust this technique takes the form of a Wagnerian intertwining of leitmotifs. In Gertrude Stein a deliberate prolixity of language gives to the words something of the capacity for repetition that music has. But it is of course Joyce who has made the most elaborate experiments in *melos*, and the bar-room scene in *Ulysses* (the one called “Sirens” in the Stuart Gilbert commentary) is, if somewhat acrobatic, still good evidence that the prose techniques just discussed have an analogy to music which is not purely fanciful. The analogy is accepted in Wyndham Lewis, for example, whose *Men Without Art* is evidently intended as a manifesto in favor of *opsis*. Here and there we can discern a tendency to *melos* even in normally unmusical writers. When in the rhetoric of *Sartor Resartus*, for instance, we run across such a passage as “From amid these confused masses of Eulogy and Elegy, with their mad Petrarchan and Werterean ware lying madly scattered among all sorts of quite extraneous matter,” we can see that some of the devices of euphuism are being used for linear accentuation instead of for parallel balance, as they would be in actual euphuism.

In prose, as in verse, the writers most frequently called musical in the sentimental sense are usually the ones most remote from actual music. The tendency to *opsis* in De Quincey, Pater, Ruskin, and Morris, to name a few at random, often includes a tendency to elaborate pictorial description and long decorative similes, but the second tendency does not define the first: we cannot judge a quality of style by choice of subject-matter. The real difference is rather in the conception of the sentence. The long sentences in the later novels of Henry James are *containing* sentences: all the qualifications and parentheses are fitted in to a pattern, and as one point after another is made, there emerges not a linear process of thought but a simultaneous comprehension. What is explained is turned around and viewed from all aspects, but it is completely there, so to speak, from the beginning. In Conrad, too, the dislocations in the narrative—working backwards and forwards, as he put it—are designed to make us shift our attention from listening to the story to looking at the central situation. His phrase “above all to make you see” contains a visual metaphor with much of its original meaning left in it. The dislocations of narrative in *Tristram Shandy* have the opposite effect: they take our attention away from looking at the external situation to listening to the process of its coming into being in the author’s mind.

As prose is by itself a transparent medium, relatively few prose writers show a pronounced leaning to one side or the other. In general, when we are most conscious of a marked “style,” or rhetorical idiosyncrasy of verbal structure, we are most likely to be in contact with either *melos* or *opsis*. Browne and Jeremy Taylor are as much inclined to *opsis* as Burton and Milton are to *melos:* the comment on Taylor made by a character in an O. Henry story, “Why doesn’t someone write words to it?”, refers to something analogous, not to music, but to a Tennysonian sound-pattern.

One may perhaps risk the generalization that the main weight of Classical influence falls on the *opsis* side, for the reason that an inflected language permits greater freedom in word order than Modern English or French, and so one tends to think of the sentence as containing all its parts at once. Even in Cicero, who is an orator, we are intensely aware of “balance,” and balance implies a neutralizing of linear movement. In later Latin a new kind of linear propulsion begins to be perceptible, and one feels closer to the new Teutonic civilization with its alliterative line and its embryonic stress-accent music. Thus in <a href="#13_notes.xhtml_fn-73" id="11_ch04.xhtml_fn73">Cassiodorus</a> thematic words and alliterative accents echo and call and respond through the turgid sentences:

Hinc etiam appellatam aestimamus chordam, quod facile corda moveat: ubi tenta vocum collecta est sub diversitate concordia, ut vicina chorda pulsata alteram faciat sponte contremiscere, quam nullam contigit attigisse.

