| 23 | *SPECIFIC THEMATIC FORMS (LYRIC AND EPOS)* |
|---|---|

SPECIFIC THEMATIC FORMS\
(LYRIC AND EPOS)

We said that the drama was an external and the lyric an internal mimesis of sound and imagery, both genres avoiding the mimesis of direct address. Again, in the terms of our first essay, drama tends to be a fictional and lyric a thematic mode. We found it most convenient to survey the specific forms of drama as a cycle of fictions, and this gave us a rough but possibly useful classification of the species of drama as well. We propose now to make a survey of a corresponding cycle of themes, and apply the survey to the lyric, <a href="#13_notes.xhtml_fn-83" id="11_ch04.xhtml_fn83">along with such <em>epos</em> forms</a>, including oratorical prose, as are sufficiently thematic or close to the lyric to belong here. Purely narrative poems, being fictions, will, if episodic, correspond to the species of drama; if continuous, to the species of prose fiction to be examined later.

The lyric, however, can obviously be on any subject and of any shape. It is not conventionalized by its audience, like the drama, or by a fixed radical of presentation, such as the drama has in the theatre. Consequently this survey will not give, and is not intended to give, a classification of specific forms of lyric: what it attempts to give is an account of the chief conventional themes of lyric and *epos*. Once more, the object is not to “fit” poems into categories, but to show empirically how conventional archetypes get embodied in conventional genres.

Let us start with the oracular associative process that we identified as one of the initiatives of lyric, and which corresponds to what we called the epiphany in drama. One of the most direct products of this is a type of religious poetry marked by a concentration of sound and ambiguity of sense, of which the most familiar modem example is the poetry of Hopkins. In religious poetry with elaborate stanzaic patterns, such as the *Pearl* and many poems of Herbert, we realize that the discipline of finding rhymes and arranging words in intricate patterns is appropriate to the sense of chastened wit, a type of *sacrificium intellectus*, that goes with the form. Such intricate verbal patterns go back through the acrostics of Aldhelm at the very beginning of poetry in England to the Hebrew psalms themselves.

We notice that a good deal of sacred literature is written in a style full of puns and verbal echoes, in which the distinction in rhythm between verse and prose is often hard to feel consistently. The English translations of the Bible, especially the 1611, preserve this oracular prose-verse rhythm admirably; the Hebrew puns of course are another matter. The curious sing-song chant of the Koran is a very pure example of oracular style, and the poetic ambiguities of the Classical oracles are in the same convention. Such features survive vestigially throughout religious poetry: in English from Anglo-Saxon times to the opening of the fifth section of *Ash Wednesday*. From what has been said it is clear that the oracle is the germ or growing point of an oratorical prose rhythm as well. The most obvious result of this is prayer, and prayer seems to require a rhetoric of parataxis, short phrases strung together in a rhythm close to free verse.

In the more public type of religious lyric represented by the Apollonian paean, the Hebrew psalm, the Christian hymn, or the Hindu Vedas, the rhythms become more stately, simple, and dignified, the “I” of the poem is one of a visible community of worshippers, and the syntax and diction become less ambiguous. Here the emphasis is usually thrown on the objectivity and ascendancy of the god, and the lyric reflects the sense of an external and social discipline.

The narrative *epos* form corresponding to the psalm or hymn presents a more connected account of the god. This myth has two main parts: legend, recounting the god’s biography or his former dealings with his people; and the description of the ritual he requires. Often the first leads up to, and provides an explanation for, the second. The Homeric hymns are largely concerned with legend; the Vedic hymns tend to subordinate the past legend to the present ritual. One may compare the “P” narrative of creation with which the Bible opens, and which, in the strophic form given it by the seven days of creation, has many of the characteristics of a hymn: here the account of creation has the establishing of the Sabbath as its climax. In contrast to the more rhapsodic or dithyrambic forms that we shall deal with later, the desire of the worshipper in the paean or psalm is not so much to be identified *with* his god as to be identified *as* his worshipper.

Closely related to the hymn is the panegyrical ode to a human representative of deity, whether hero or king. In some of the Hebrew psalms, notably the 45th, the king is the intermediary figure out of which the Messiah, the son of David who reaches the extreme both of exaltation and of suffering for his people, develops. In Greek literature, the Pindaric ode focusses on the victorious athlete who, though a human figure, has the ritual link with deity brought out by the mythology and legend incorporated into the ode. In Roman times the honors paid to the Emperor and the state provided another focus for mythological panegyric, which continues in the fourth eclogue of Virgil, the first of Calpurnius, and the *Carmen Saeculare* of Horace. Later the chief form of panegyric becomes the poem in praise of the Courtly Love mistress. The panegyric is also one of the rhetorical prose forms, not one with a very impressive literary record when its subject is a human being, but capable of some flexibility in more impersonal directions. Prose panegyrics of virtues or aspects of culture, notably poetry, appear from time to time, often in the quasi-legal aspect of the apology or defence. In poetry itself we have such forms as the St. Cecilia ode, the panegyric of music. The epithalamium, the triumph, and similar poems of festivity or procession are also species of panegyric. As it is naturally a public convention, the panegyric is often in an extended form which combines both lyric and *epos* characteristics.

In the panegyric the poet invites his reader to gaze with him at something else. If this something else is not visibly present, we have the poem of community, such as we get in patriotic verse of all kinds. The poem of community brings us to the next cardinal point of the lyric, defined earlier as the charm or response to some kind of physical or quasi-physical compulsion—perhaps propulsion is the word. One’s education in this type of charm begins with nursery rhymes, where the infant is swung or bounced to the rhythm, or where the theme includes some form of affectionate assault on the child. It continues through college yells, sing-songs, and similar forms of *participation mystique*. The national anthem is another form which illustrates the close relationship to the poem of community. In earlier societies we find work songs in peace and battle songs in war, both with the same characteristics. Of *epos* developments, the best known is the ballad, many features of which, such as incremental repetition and the demand for attention with which it often begins, are so close to the poem of community as to have led some scholars to believe that its origin was in communal composition. The cardinal point of oratorical prose corresponding to the charm is the commandment or exhortation, and of the longer prose forms founded on the exhortation the most highly developed in Western literature is the sermon. Other forms will be mentioned later.

*Participation mystique* is essentially spasmodic: in primitive communities it may be sustained for hours by dance, and in decadent ones by oratory, but in a state of culture it falls into the background. For literature, the disappearance of the visible presence of panegyric usually means the invisible presence of death. With the panegyrical funeral ode we move from the conventions corresponding to the dramatic *auto* to those corresponding to tragedy. Here we meet first of all the elegy or threnody on the death of a hero, friend, leader or mistress. Threnodies also show a strong tendency to mythological expansion: the subject is not only idealized but often exalted into a nature-spirit or dying god. The pastoral elegy, which traditionally identifies its subject with Adonis, forms the conventional center of the threnody. Some of Wordsworth’s Lucy poems indicate the capacity of even a very brief and simple elegy to absorb such imagery. The corresponding form in oratorical prose is the *oraison funèbre*, which survives in some forms of modern obituary: here, as is natural for a prose medium, mythological expansion is less marked, and is often replaced by doctrinal or conceptual expansion. A rare and difficult *epos* form, the tragic panegyric, in which a hero is presented as a tragic figure as well as a conquering hero, is represented by Marvell’s ode on Cromwell and by its prototype, the Regulus ode of Horace.

We come to a more isolated form of elegy in the convention of the epitaph, in which the whole shape of a life is frequently indicated. Epitaphs may vary in tone from the panegyrical to the ribald, but even in the Greek Anthology they retain something of their original function as markers, as something visibly set up to arrest the passer-by and compel him to read. The corresponding *epos* form is the historical epitaph, the meditation over a vanished past which has the same relation to the ruin that the individual epitaph has to the gravestone. In prose there is the rhetorical elegiac meditation represented in English by Browne’s *Urn Burial*.

Still closer to irony is the complaint, the poem of exile, neglect or protest at cruelty. Here the individual demanding attention, unlike the corpse in the epitaph, is able to speak for himself, and is of course usually represented as the poet himself. This theme takes up most of the Courtly Love convention, where the central archetype is the scornful and unrelenting mistress. Such a figure is an ironic reversal of the original form of pastoral elegy. The most logical person to lament the death of Adonis is Venus, though she seldom does so in literature unless that specific myth is the theme; but in most Courtly Love poetry the mistress is responsible for all the lover’s sufferings, including his death. We shall meet this ambivalent female figure later in the essay. The complaint is easily extended into *epos* forms, including narrative tragedies in which the emotional focus is not the catastrophe but the lament following the catastrophe, as in the two narrative poems of Shakespeare.

The phase of tragic irony is represented by the poem of melancholy in its extreme form of accidia or ennui, where the individual is so isolated as to feel his existence a living death. In Baudelaire’s *géante* the scornful mistress takes on a more deeply sinister tone, and the theme of death is presented in terms of simple physical dissolution: “earth upon earth,” as a medieval poem has it. The appropriate *epos* form of this phase is the *danse macabre*, the poem of the dying community.

Our next cardinal point is difficult to name: we might almost parody Hopkins’s term and call it the poem of “outscape.” It is the lyrical counterpart of what in drama we call the mime, the center of the irony which is common to tragedy and comedy. It is a convention of pure projected detachment, in which an image, a situation, or a mood is observed with all the imaginative energy thrown outward to it and away from the poet. The word epigram in its broadest sense defines some of its characteristics, except that epigram as ordinarily used leans strongly in the direction of comedy and satire. The lyrical poetry of China and Japan appears to be based very largely on this convention, in striking contrast to Western poetry, where epigram shows much more of a tendency to attach emotions or make out a rhetorical case. Some of Shakespeare’s sonnets, such as “The expense of spirit in a waste of shame,” are exceptions.

The corresponding cardinal point of prose is the proverb or aphorism, the germ of such forms as the wisdom literature of the Bible. Here we are close to the counsel-of-prudence type of satire, and at the opposite pole from the oracle. The proverb is a secular or purely human oracle: it usually has the same rhetorical features, alliteration, assonance, parallelism, that we find in the oracle, but it is addressed to the detached consciousness and the critical wit. Its authority comes from experience: for it, wisdom is the tried and tested way; only folly seeks what is new, and the essential virtues are prudence and moderation. The proverbs in Blake’s *Marriage of Heaven and Hell* are parody-proverbs, written from the oracular or epiphanic point of view.

As we move into the conventions of satire, either in the lyric forms of Hardy and Housman or the *epos* form of Dryden and Pope, the features of epigram and proverb persist. Such poets produce brilliance and clarity rather than mystery or magic, and their technique is concerned with concentration of sense. Two things are essential to this: one is a tight metrical framework of words stepping along in a sharply outlined order; the other is a clear statement of what sound-patterns we may expect, such as the full ring of the rhyming couplet. Additional or unexpected sound-patterns, such as alliteration or assonance within the line, are kept to a minimum, and the poetry follows Wordsworth’s precept in being, except for the metre, very like non-rhetorical prose in its diction. The *epos* and prose forms of this phase, such as the epistle and the formal satire, are naturally very close together.

In satire observation is still primary, but as the observed phenomena move from the sinister to the grotesque, they grow more illusory and unsubstantial. We note among *epos* forms a comic counterpart of the *danse macabre:* the “testament” poem, of which the best known English example is Swift’s poem on his death. Closely related to the testament convention are Donne’s Anniversaries, where the death of a girl expands into a general satire or “anatomy”—this term will also meet us later.

We are now in the area corresponding to comedy, and still within the vision of experience. The convention that marks a slight removal from satire is the poem of paradox, i.e., the poem in which some form of paradox is the theme and not simply an incidental feature of the technique. Naturally we find many of this type in the “metaphysical” poetry which makes a regular use of a deliberately forced and consequently humorous conceit. Donne and Herbert provide examples, and so does Emily Dickinson. The paradox is among other things often a paradox of feeling as well, so that we are sometimes in doubt whether to “take” the poem seriously or humorously. The paradox poem belongs in the comedy of experience, near satire, because paradox in poetry is usually an ironic treatment of quixotic love or religion, like the stylized Petrarchan code of which Donne remarks “May barren angels love so,” or the vaunting virtue that ignominiously collapses into human nature in some poems of Herbert. Another paradoxical treatment of the Courtly Love convention is the pastourelle, or deadlocked love dialogue. A closely related *epos* form, recalling the association of comedy with law courts, is the debate, in which two sides of a question are argued at length and then submitted to an umpire, who often postpones or puts off the decision. Examples include *The Owl and the Nightingale*, Chaucer’s *Parliament of Fowls*, and Spenser’s Mutability Cantos.

A less ambiguous form of lyrical comedy is represented by the *carpe diem* poem based on a moment of pleasure in experience. The mood of such a poem is one of detachment, both subjective and objective. The poet is usually, even when drunk, in full conscious control, and the moment of pleasure itself is detached from time. Most unqualified poems of joy are associated with some kind of innocent vision, as in Blake: the great Epicurean poets, from Horace to Herrick, accept the limitations of joy in experience, its transience in an abyss of “endless night.” Even in Herrick there are many features, such as the love of folklore and the imagery of clothes, jewels and perfumes, which indicate an affinity with masque rather than comedy. The limits of ordinary experience in lyrical comedy are reached by the poem of the quiet mind, the triumphant *eiron* or “settled low content,” the serenity which adjusts itself to experience and renounces the emotionally quixotic. Wordsworth’s formula of tranquil recollection marks his tendency to remain within the state of experience, in contrast to most Romantics. The *epos* expression of serenity is frequently the descriptive poem, where the poet climbs a hill and surveys a landscape below, an imitation in experience of the point of epiphany. The poem of the quiet mind, if it has a subject beyond recommending itself, attempts to communicate to the reader a private and secret possession, which brings us to the next cardinal point, the riddle.

The idea of the riddle is descriptive containment: the subject is not described but circumscribed, a circle of words drawn around it. In simple riddles, the central subject is an image, and the reader feels impelled to guess, that is, to equate the poem to the name or sign-symbol of its image. A slightly more complicated form of riddle is the emblematic vision, probably one of the oldest forms of human communication, where an example will be briefer than description:

And the Lord said unto me, Amos, what seest thou? And I said, A plumbline. Then said the Lord, Behold, I will set a plumbline in the midst of my people Israel.

Other prophets are represented as carrying symbolic apparatus around with them, like Diogenes’ lantern, a rhetorical device surviving as late as Burke’s dagger. Literary developments of the same form include the emblem itself, to the tradition of which Blake’s tiger and sunflower and sick rose belong, and such pictorial conceit-poems as Herbert’s *Pulley*. The connection of the emblematic vision with the heraldic image of modern fiction is easy to see. In *symbolisme* we have a third form of riddle where it is normally a mood rather than an object that is contained. Here, too, as usually happens in sophisticated developments, simpler elements in the same tradition survive vestigially, like the riddling “ptyx” in Mallarmé.

The riddle and emblematic vision are closely related to the corresponding cardinal point of prose, which is the parable or fable, both of which are of course *epos* forms as well. The fable is the simpler of the two forms, and nearer the simple riddle, the providing of the moral in the fable being the counterpart of guessing the riddle. The parable is a more highly developed form with a greater tendency to contain its own moral. In the fable, mythical stylizing (talking animals and the like) is a regular feature of the narrative; in the parable the stylizing is less obvious. Of the parables of Jesus, only the parable of the sheep and goats, which is an apocalypse, makes much use of material outside the realistic range of credibility.

In Herrick’s poems on primroses and daffodils we are still very close to the fable and emblem tradition: so close that there is no incongruity in “reading a lecture” from the primroses. Nevertheless Herrick’s daffodils, unlike Wordsworth’s, are directly confronted, and the confronted image readily becomes personified. Here we are in the area corresponding to the masque in drama, and the innocent vision and the fairyland of animistic romance return. The poem of imaginative confrontation, where a close connection between the poet’s mood and the imagery is expressed by the personifying of the imagery, is the genre of the Keats ode, the Grecian Urn being the nearest to the emblem poem. The next step takes us into the pastoral, where we come back to the mode of romance mentioned in the first essay, pity and terror becoming modes of pleasure, usually the beautiful and the sublime respectively. These are generally thought of as a contrast, as they are in Milton’s wonderful diptych of idyllic and pensive moods, but occasionally, as in some of the “green” poems of Marvell, we have a poetry of absorption so complete that the two moods seem blended into one.

But when the vision of innocence becomes unified, the contrasting vision of experience often reappears, in a convention that we might call the poem of expanded consciousness, where the poet balances the catharsis of his view of experience with the ecstasis of his view of a spiritual, invisible, or imaginative world. Here, as in the corresponding forms of drama, we have not a direct mimesis of life but a spectacular mimesis of it, able to look down on experience because of the simultaneous presence of another kind of vision. In drama this spectacular mimesis is attained by the help of music as well as spectacle. Music and painting cannot express the tragic or comic, which are verbal conceptions only: they express moods which we may fit to tragedy or comedy if we have some literary program ready for them. In our day the most impressive examples of the poem of expanded consciousness are the Eliot quartets and the Duino elegies of Rilke, and the musical references of the one and the pictorial images of the other express the close affinity of the genre with arts which, much more obviously than poetry, do not speak.

The next convention we might call the recognition poem, the poem which reverses the usual associations of dream and waking, so that it is experience that seems to be the nightmare and the vision that seems to be reality. The *epos* form of this convention includes the medieval love vision, where we have again a *spectacle* of a direct personal relation, attained by being placed in an extraordinary world. Of lyrical forms, a very pure modern example, generically speaking, is Eliot’s *Marina*, which is close to the corresponding dramatic forms. Many of Rilke’s Orpheus sonnets belong to it; it is also the central convention of Vaughan and Traherne. This theme is rare and difficult to handle in the rhythm of prose, but we have it in the *Centuries of Meditation*, especially the famous “The corn was orient and immortal wheat” passage.

A very important group of recognition poems are the poems of self-recognition, where the poet himself is involved in the awakening from experience into a visionary reality. Examples include Collins’s *Ode on the Poetical Character*, Coleridge’s *Kubla Khan*, and Yeats’s *Tower* and *Sailing to Byzantium*. This genre is near the boundary line of our next and last group of themes, which bring us back to the oracle again. These are the dithyrambic or rhapsodic forms, where the poet feels taken possession of by some internal and quasi-personal force. Nearest the poem of recognition is the poem of iconic response, such as we have in some of the odes of Crashaw; in Romantic times a more subjective and dithyrambic form became very popular. Shelley’s *Ode to the West Wind*, a good deal of Swinburne, of Victor Hugo, of Nietzsche (who makes the curious statement that he invented the dithyramb), of Blake’s prophecies, especially the ninth night of *The Four Zoas*, and the two great poems of Smart, are examples. Most of these are *epos* forms: the dithyrambic lends itself readily to recurring metre. Of lyric forms, we may note the convention of the mad song, which we have in Edgar’s songs in *King Lear*, in Yeats’s Crazy Jane poems, and sporadically in a few other poets, including Scott. As the singer of a mad song is usually a vagrant, he suggests a closer rapport with mysterious beings and forces, such as nature-spirits, than normal people have. On a more sophisticated level, where the poet suggests the breaking of autonomous visions into his own mind, the *illuminations* of Rimbaud may be mentioned.

As we come nearer to the oracular rhythm with which we began, the rhythms of verse and prose begin to merge once more. We notice in Whitman, for example, that there is a strong pause at the end of every line—naturally enough, for where the rhythm is irregular there is no point in a run-on line. The rhythm is approaching a form in which the lyrical associative rhythm, the *epos* line and the prose sentence are becoming much the same unit, a tendency that we can observe in dithyrambic poetry as naive as Ossian’s or as sophisticated as the modern French developments of it that follow the *Saison en Enfer*.

