| 26 | *THE RHETORIC OF NON-LITERARY PROSE* |
|---|---|

THE RHETORIC OF NON-LITERARY PROSE

Prose is, unlike verse, used also for non-literary purposes: it extends not only to the literary boundaries of *melos* and *opsis*, but to the outer worlds of *praxis* and *theoria*, social action and individual thought themselves. Renaissance critics used to argue about what the greatest form for poetry was, and whether it was epic or tragedy. There is probably no answer to such a question, but one can learn a good deal about literary form by discussing it. Now if we ask the question: What is the greatest possible *prose* form? there is probably no answer to that question either, but the moment we ask it, a great number of works, the Bible, the dialogues of Plato, the meditations of Pascal—in fact, all “great books” usually placed outside literature—leap into a new literary significance. It is thus necessary for us at this point to consider what literary elements are involved in the verbal structures in which the literary or hypothetical intention is not the primary one.

We are still thinking of literature as facing the world of social action on one side, and of individual thought on the other, so that the rhetoric of non-literary prose would tend to emphasize emotion and the appeal to action through the ear in the former area, and intellect and the appeal to contemplation based predominantly on visual metaphors in the latter. Let us begin with that extensive suburb of prose that is concerned with the technique of social or oratorical persuasion.

The most concentrated examples of this are to be found in the pamphlet or speech that catches the rhythm of history, that seizes on a crucial event or phase of action, interprets it, articulates the emotions concerned with it, or in some means employs a verbal structure to insulate and conduct the current of history. *Areopagitica*, Johnson’s letter to Chesterfield, some sermons in the period between Latimer and the Commonwealth, some of Burke’s speeches, Lincoln’s Gettysburg address, Vanzetti’s death speech, Churchill’s 1940 speeches, are a few examples that come readily to mind. None of these were designed with a primarily literary intention, and would have failed of their original purpose if they had been, but they are literary now, and data for the critic. Nearly all of them are marked by the emphatic patterns of repetition and anaphora characteristic of rhetorical prose.

The measured cadences of these historical oracles represent a kind of strategic withdrawal from action: they marshal and review the ranks of familiar but deeply-held ideas. The rhetoric of persuasion to action itself, which is the next stage of prose as we proceed from literature outwards into social life, is considerably stepped up in its rhythm. Here the repetitions are hypnotic and incantatory, aimed at breaking down customary associations of ideas and habitual responses, and at excluding any alternative line of action. Such a rhetoric may be heard in its purest form in the speech rhythms of a boy talking to a dog, with the object of persuading him to sit up or shake hands or otherwise move out of the normal line of canine endeavor. When addressed to a human audience, such rhetoric must follow the dialectic of rhetoric: it must have either a rallying point or a point of attack, or both. The rhetoric of attack or invective is exemplified in the pulpit’s crusade against sin and in the prosecutor’s summing-up in the courtroom. The latter has produced the by-form of the philippic, the indictment of a social enemy. The rhetoric of eulogy, the so-called epideictic rhetoric of the Classical world, is in our day most clearly seen in advertising and publicity, although it has a more genuinely literary form in the type of “purple passage” prose, usually with a descriptive content, that attempts to communicate some kind of wordless emotion.

As these examples show, we are moving rapidly away from literature towards the direct verbal expression of kinetic emotion. The further we go in this direction, the more likely the author is to be, or to pretend to be, emotionally involved with his subject, so that what he exhorts us to embrace or avoid is in part a projection from his own emotional life. As this increases, a certain automatism comes into the writing: the verbal expression of infantile-centered hatreds, fears, loves, and objects of adoration. When <a href="#13_notes.xhtml_fn-87" id="11_ch04.xhtml_fn87">Swinburne</a> speaks of “the yelling Yahoos whom the scandalous and senseless license of our own day allows to run and roar about the country unmuzzled and unwhipped,” we may not know what he is referring to, but a glance at the prose structure, with its automatic alliteration and doubling of adjectives, makes it clear that whatever it is we hardly need to take it seriously. Such writing is a familiar and easily recognized phenomenon: it is tantrum prose, the prose of so much Victorian criticism, of several acres of Carlyle and Ruskin, of clerical denunciations of heresies or secular amusements, of totalitarian propaganda, and in fact of nearly all rhetoric in which we feel that the author’s pen is running away from him, setting up a mechanical for an imaginative impetus. The metaphor of “intoxication” is often employed for the breakdown of rhetorical control.

The more incoherent this kind of rhetoric becomes, the more clearly it shows itself to be an attempt to express emotion apart from or without intellect. At this point we enter the area of emotional jargon, which consists largely in an obsessive repetition of verbal formulas. Not far removed is the kind of vulgar inarticulateness that uses one word, generally unprintable, for the whole rhetorical ornament of the sentence, including adjectives, adverbs, epithets, and punctuation. Finally, words disappear altogether, and we are back to a primitive language of screams and gestures and sighs. The whole sequence can of course be imitated within literature, Shakespeare giving us everything from Henry V’s address before the walls of Harfleur to Othello’s “goats and monkeys” speech. The imitation of emotional rhetoric in literary prose is a feature making for *melos* in the latter. Similarly in literature we occasionally run across a writer who uses such rhetorical material without being able to absorb or assimilate it: the result is pathological, a kind of literary diabetes, and may be studied in the novels of Amanda Ros.

The expression of conceptual thought in prose exhibits a parallel sequence of phenomena, moving in the opposite direction. Philosophy is assertive or propositional writing, and we notice in the history of philosophy a persistent attempt to isolate the rhythm of the proposition. Philosophy begins in proverbs and axioms, and at various times it has produced the dialectic dialogue of Plato and the Upanishads, the closely related question-objection-answer scheme of St. Thomas, the quasi-mathematical arrangements of ideas in Spinoza, the aphorisms of Bacon (who remarks that aphorisms are a sign of vitality in philosophy), and, in our day, the numbered propositions of Wittgenstein’s *Tractatus*. All of these are clearly at least in part endeavors to purify verbal communication of the emotional content of rhetoric; all of them, however, impress the literary critic as being themselves rhetorical devices.

The implication is that there is a conceptual rhetoric aimed, like persuasive rhetoric, at separating emotion and intellect, but attempting to throw away the emotional half. It seeks the book and the individual reader as its fellow seeks the audience; its goal is understanding as the goal of persuasion is action or emotional response. A good deal of the strategy of teaching is rhetorical strategy, choosing words and images with great care in order to evoke the response: “I never thought of it that way before,” or “Now that you put it that way, I can see it.” What distinguishes, not simply the epigram, but profundity itself from platitude is very frequently rhetorical wit. In fact it may be doubted whether we ever really call an idea profound unless we are pleased with the wit of its expression. Teaching, like persuasion, employs a dissociative rhetoric aimed at breaking down habitual response: the maddening prolixity of Oriental sutras results from this, and there are passages in the New Testament almost as dissociative as Gertrude Stein:

That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, of the Word of life; (For the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness, and shew unto you that eternal life, which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us;) That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you …

Without trying to suggest that only good writers can be good philosophers, we may still observe that much of the *difficulty* in a philosophical style is rhetorical in origin, resulting from a feeling that it is necessary to detach and isolate the intellect from the emotions. A sentence from James Mill’s *Essay on Government* will illustrate what I mean:

One caution, first of all, we should take along with us, and it is this: that all those persons who hold the powers of government without having an identity of interests with the community, and all those persons who share in the profits which are made by the abuse of those powers, and all those persons whom the example and representations of the two first classes influence, will be sure to represent the community, or a part having an identity of interest with the community, as incapable in the highest degree of acting according to their own interest; it being clear that they who have not an identity of interest with the community ought to hold the power of government no longer, if those who have that identity of interest could be expected to act in any tolerable conformity with their interest.

This is finally discovered to mean, after one has worked it all out like a crossword puzzle, that those who have a stake in one form of government are likely to resist the introduction of another. The critic, searching for the reasons why, if James Mill meant that, he could not have said it, eventually realizes that the style is motivated by a perverse, bristly intellectual honesty. *He* will not condescend to employ any of the pretty arts of persuasion, sugar-coated illustrations or emotionally-loaded terms; he will appeal only to the cold logic of reason itself—reinforced, to be sure, by a peculiarly Victorian sense that the more difficult the style, the tougher the moral and intellectual fibre one develops in wrestling with it.

We note that the basis of James Mill’s rhetoric is the imitation of legal style, with its careful qualifying inclusiveness. The long containing sentences of the later Henry James already mentioned illustrate the literary use of similar devices. Passing over some intermediate stages, we eventually arrive, in this pursuit of non-emotional rhetoric, at conceptual jargon, otherwise known as gobble-dygook or officialese. This is a naive intensification of Mill’s desire to speak with the voice, not of personality, but of Reason itself. The jargon of government reports, inter-office memoranda, and military instructions is motivated by a wish to be as impersonal as possible, to represent verbally the Institution or some anonymous cybernetic deity functioning in a state of “normalcy.” What it actually utters, of course, is the voice of the lonely crowd, the anxiety of the outward-directed conformist. Such jargon may be called, borrowing a term from medicine, benign jargon: it is unmistakably a disease of language, but not—yet—a cancerous disease like a demagogue’s oratory. It is found in most aspects of journalism and is the dress uniform of a large amount of professional writing, including that of humanists. That it could become malignant is indicated in 1984, where a further stage of it is caricatured as “Newspeak,” a pseudo-logical simplification of language which has, like emotional jargon, complete automatism as its goal. We are not surprised to find that the further we depart from literature, or the use of language to express the completely integrated state of emotional consciousness we call imagination, the nearer we come to the use of language as the expression of reflex. Whether we go in the emotional or in the intellectual direction, we arrive at much the same point, a point antipodal to literature in which language is a running commentary on the unconscious, like a squirrel’s chatter.

If there is such a thing as conceptual rhetoric, which is likely to increase in proportion as the discursive writer tries to avoid it, it seems as though the direct union of grammar and logic, which we suggested at the beginning of this essay might be the characteristic of the non-literary verbal structure, does not, in the long run, exist. Anything which makes a functional use of words will always be involved in all the technical problems of words, including rhetorical problems. The only road from grammar to logic, then, runs through the intermediate territory of rhetoric.

We notice in the first place that attempts to reduce grammar to logic, or logic to grammar, have not had the success they should have had if there were a large and important non-rhetorical common factor on which non-literary writing could be built. For a long time the prestige of the discursive reason fostered the notion that logic was the formal cause of language, that universal grammars on logical principles were possible, and that the entire resources of linguistic expression could be categorized. We are now more accustomed to think of reasoning as one of many things that man does with words, a specialized function of language. There seems to be no evidence whatever that man learned to speak primarily because he wanted to speak logically.

The attempts to reduce logic to grammar are more recent, but not much more successful. Logic grows out of grammar, the unconscious or potential logic inherent in language, and we often find that the containing forms of conceptual thought are of grammatical origin, the stock example being the subject and predicate of Aristotelian logic. The fluid primitive linguistic conceptions often mentioned by anthropologists, such as the Polynesian *mana* or the Iroquois *orenda*, are participial or gerundive conceptions: they belong in a world where energy and matter have not been clearly separated, either in thought or into the verbs and nouns of our own less flexible language-structure. As energy and matter are not clearly separated in nuclear physics either, we might do worse than to return to such “primitive” words ourselves. The words atom and light, for example, being nouns, may be too material and static to be adequate symbols for what they now mean, and when they pass from the equations of a physicist into the linguistic apparatus of contemporary social consciousness, the grammatical difficulties in the translation show up clearly.

But there is still the scholar’s mate in the argument for reducing logic to grammar: the fallacy of thinking that we have explained the nature of something by accounting for its origin in something else. Logic may have grown out of grammar, but to grow out of something is in part to outgrow it. For grammar may also be a hampering force in the development of logic, and a major source of logical confusions and pseudo-problems. These confusions extend much further than even the enormous brood of fallacies spawned by paronomasia, which is, like so many of our phenomena, a structural principle in literature and an obstacle in discursive writing. For instance, many long arguments may be annihilated by a grammatical change from definite articles and statements of identity to indefinite articles and active verbs. To say “reason is *a* function of the mind” is unlikely to lead to dispute; to say “reason is *the* function of the mind” involves one in a pointless struggle for the exclusive possession of an essence. To say “art communicates” is similarly to be content with an obvious plurality of functions: to say “art is communication” forces us into circular wrangling around a metaphor taken as an assertion. It is no wonder, then, that many logicians tend to think of grammar as something of a logical disease, some of them even maintaining that mathematics is the real source of coherence in logic. I have no opinion on this, except to repeat that anything which makes a functional use of words will always be involved in all the problems of words.

Grammar and logic both seem to develop through internal conflict. The humanist tradition has always, and rightly, stressed the importance of linguistic conflict in training the mind: if we do not know another language, we have missed the best and simplest opportunity of getting our ideas disentangled from the swaddling clothes of their native syntax. Similarly logic cannot develop properly without dialectic, the principle of opposition in thought. Now when people speaking different languages come into contact, an *ideogrammatic* structure is built up out of the efforts at communication. The figure 5 is an ideogram, because it means the same number to people who call it five, cinq, cinque, fünf, and a dozen other things. Similarly, the purely linguistic associations of English “time” and French “temps” are different, but it is quite practicable to translate Proust or Bergson on time into English without serious risk of misunderstanding the meaning. When two languages are in different cultural orbits, like English and Zulu, the ideogrammatic structure is more difficult to build up, but it always seems to be more or less possible. There are French equivalents for all English words and ideas, but obviously one cannot walk into a Polynesian or Iroquois society and ask: “What are y*our* words for God, the soul, reality, knowledge?” They may have no such words or concepts, nor can we give them our equivalents for *mana* and *orenda*. Yet it seems clear that we can eventually, with patient and sympathetic study, find out what is going on in a Polynesian or Iroquois mind. The problems of communication between two people speaking the same language may in some respects be even greater, because more difficult to become aware of, but even they can be ultimately surmounted. It is out of such ideogrammatic inner structures, whether produced linguistically between two languages, or psychologically between two people speaking the same language, that the capacity to assimilate language to rational thought develops.

This ideogrammatic middle ground between two languages, or between two personal structures of meaning in the same language, must itself be a symbolic structure, not simply a bilingual dictionary. Hence the ideogram is neither purely grammatical nor purely logical: it is both at once, and rhetorical as well, for, like rhetoric, it brings an *audience* into being, and reinforces the language of consciousness with that of association. The ideogram, in short, is a metaphor, the identification of two things of which each retains its own form, the realization that what you mean by X in this context is what I mean by Y. Ṡuch an ideogram may differ from the purely hypothetical metaphor of the poem, but the mental leap of metaphor away from the simple “this means that” sign is present in it.

Whether the reader agrees with all this or not, he may at any rate be willing to admit the <a href="#13_notes.xhtml_fn-88" id="11_ch04.xhtml_fn88">possibility of links</a> between grammar and rhetoric, and between rhetoric and logic, that have a neglected but crucial importance. Let us take the link of grammar and rhetoric first.

We remember that a good deal of verbal creation begins in associative babble, in which sound and sense are equally involved. The result of this is poetic ambiguity, the fact that, as remarked earlier, the poet does not define his words but establishes their powers by placing them in a great variety of contexts. Hence the importance of poetic etymology, or the tendency to associate words similar in sound or sense. For many centuries this tendency passed itself off as genuine etymology, and the student was taught to think in terms of verbal association. He learned to think of snow as coming etymologically as well as physically from clouds *(nix a nubes*), and of dark groves as derived from sunlight (the derivation by opposites which produced the famous *lucus a non lucendo)*. When real etymology developed, this associative process was discarded as mumbo-jumbo, which it is from one point of view, but it remains a factor of great importance in criticism. Here again we meet the principle that an analogy between A and B (in this case two words) may still be important even if the view that A is the source of B is dropped. Whether or not one is etymologically justified in associating Prometheus with forethought or Odysseus with wrath, the poets have accepted such associations and they are data for the critic. Whether or not “new” critics make mistakes or anachronisms in explicating the texture of earlier poetry, the principle involved is defensible historically as well as psychologically.

We soon become aware, moreover, that verbal association is still a factor of importance even in rational thought. One of the most effective methods of conveying meaning in translation, for instance, is to leave a key word untranslated, so that the reader has to pick up its contextual associations in the original language from his own. Again, in trying to understand the thought of a philosopher, one often starts by considering a single word, say nature in Aristotle, substance in Spinoza, or time in Bergson, in the total range of its connotations. One often feels that a full understanding of such a word would be a key to the understanding of the whole system. If so, it would be a metaphorical key, as it would be a set of identifications made by the thinker with the word. The attempt to regard such connotative terms as invariably fallacious does not get us very far. Students are often graduated from college armed only with complaints that people will not define their terms, reason clearly, or argue about freedom or order without emotional attachments to those words. It is perhaps more useful to shift our attention from what verbal communication is not to what it is, and what is communicated is usually some ambiguous and emotionally charged complex. In any case the notion that it is possible to reduce language to sign-language, to make one word invariably mean one thing, is an illusion. After one has removed associative ambiguity from verbs and nouns, one has then the problem of adjectives and adverbs, which are universals by their very nature, and finally prepositions and conjunctions, which, being pure connectives, will always display a disconcerting semantic versatility. A glance at the N.E.D. entries for “to,” “for,” and “in” should discourage the brashest of verbal atomizers.

The link between rhetoric and logic is “doodle” or associative diagram, the expression of the conceptual by the spatial. A great number of prepositions are spatial metaphors, most of them derived from the orientation of the human body. Every use of “up,” “down,” “besides,” “on the other hand,” “under” implies a subconscious diagram in the argument, whatever it is. If a writer says “But on the other hand there is a further consideration to be brought forward in support of the opposing argument,” he may be writing normal (if wordy) English, but he is also doing precisely what an armchair strategist does when he scrawls plans of battle on a tablecloth. Very often a “structure” or “system” of thought can be reduced to a diagrammatic pattern—in fact both words are to some extent synonyms of diagram. A philosopher is of great assistance to his reader when he realizes the presence of such a diagram and extracts it, as Plato does in his discussion of the divided line. We cannot go far in any argument without realizing that there is some kind of graphic formula involved. All division and categorization, the use of chapters, the topotropism (if I have constructed this correctly) signalled by “let us now turn to” or “reverting to the point made earlier,” the sense of what “fits” the argument, the feeling that one point is “central” and another peripheral, has some kind of geometrical basis.

It used to be said that, as all abstract words were originally concrete metaphors, something of the latter will always adhere to the word through all its semantic history. This view is discredited now, but it still has much truth in it: I question whether it is really possible to make B depend on A without in some measure hanging it on, or involve B with A without in some measure wrapping them up. The only fallacy in it, I think, is the assumption that the attached metaphor must necessarily be the one implied in the etymology of the word. Of course a writer may give a word a meaning which has no recognizable connection with its origin. But it looks as though abstract words and ideas were on loan, so to speak, from a latent concrete formulation which is to be found, not in the history of the word used, but in the structure of the argument into which the word is fitted.

As soon as one starts to think of the role of association and diagram in argument, one begins to realize how extraordinarily pervasive they are. I once heard a preacher advocate religion on the ground that science was too cold and dry to serve as a guide to life, while the heat of revolutionary zeal still left one thirsting for something more. The figures seemed commonplace, yet it was clear that the ancient diagram of the four principles of substance, hot, cold, moist, and dry, was the graphic formula of his argument, and that religion meant something wet to him, a fertilizing moisture that would warm the scientists and cool the radicals. The same principle of a graphic formula is found in such assumptions as: that the intellect is cool and sober and the emotions warm and drunk; that the practical sense walks and the imaginative one leaps; that facts are solid (“stubborn”), hypotheses liquid (“covering” facts), and theories gaseous; that whatever is “inside” the mind is dimly lit and whatever is “outside” it clear, and so on. Also in value-assumptions: that the concrete is better than the abstract, the active better than the passive, the dynamic better than the static, the unified better than the multiple, the simple better than the complex. Religious people think of heaven as “up”; psychologists think of the subconscious as “underneath” the consciousness, both words being obviously spatial metaphors.

We could go on for a long time, but by now it is surely clear that it is wiser simply to become aware of metaphor than to try to eradicate it. Attempts to analyze metaphor solely to debunk an argument or suggest that it is “nothing but” a metaphor are not to be encouraged. What is to be encouraged is the analysis itself, in which there is, I think, an activity of considerable and increasing importance for literary critics, as the conclusion of this book will suggest.

The discursive reason has traditionally been given the place of honor in Western culture. In religion, no poetry outside Scripture is given the authority of the theologian’s propositions; in philosophy, the reason is the high priest of reality (unless there are special features in the philosophy giving a peculiar importance to the arts, as there are in Schelling’s); in science the same hierarchical diagram is even clearer. Hence the arts have been traditionally regarded as forms of “accommodation,” their function being to establish a link between reason and whatever is put “below” it on the assumed diagram, such as the emotions or the senses. It is thus no surprise to find “accommodation” in verbal structures aimed at rousing emotion or at some form of kinetic persuasion. Such accommodation has been recognized for centuries, as it is consistent with the traditional subordinating of rhetoric to dialectic. The notion of a *conceptual* rhetoric raises new problems, as it suggests that nothing built out of words can transcend the nature and conditions of words, and that the nature and conditions of *ratio*, so far as *ratio* is verbal, are contained by *oratio*.



