---
cena_id: 05_etica/01_etica_nicomaco/L05-C03_cena06
obra_pt: "Ética a Nicômaco"
obra_en: "Nicomachean Ethics"
categoria: 05_etica
obra_slug: 01_etica_nicomaco
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Ross
livro_num: 5
livro_marker: "BOOK V"
capitulo_num: 3
capitulo_marker: 3
sub_cena_num: 6
sub_cena_total: 7
audio_in_obra_idx: 48
audio_in_obra_total: 111
chars: 7497
---

Of the questions we intended to discuss two still remain for discussion;
(3) whether it is the man who has assigned to another more than his
share that acts unjustly, or he who has the excessive share, and (4)
whether it is possible to treat oneself unjustly. The questions are
connected; for if the former alternative is possible and the distributor
acts unjustly and not the man who has the excessive share, then if
a man assigns more to another than to himself, knowingly and voluntarily,
he treats himself unjustly; which is what modest people seem to do,
since the virtuous man tends to take less than his share. Or does
this statement too need qualification? For (a) he perhaps gets more
than his share of some other good, e.g. of honour or of intrinsic
nobility. (b) The question is solved by applying the distinction we
applied to unjust action; for he suffers nothing contrary to his own
wish, so that he is not unjustly treated as far as this goes, but
at most only suffers harm. 

It is plain too that the distributor acts unjustly, but not always
the man who has the excessive share; for it is not he to whom what
is unjust appertains that acts unjustly, but he to whom it appertains
to do the unjust act voluntarily, i.e. the person in whom lies the
origin of the action, and this lies in the distributor, not in the
receiver. Again, since the word 'do' is ambiguous, and there is a
sense in which lifeless things, or a hand, or a servant who obeys
an order, may be said to slay, he who gets an excessive share does
not act unjustly, though he 'does' what is unjust. 

Again, if the distributor gave his judgement in ignorance, he does
not act unjustly in respect of legal justice, and his judgement is
not unjust in this sense, but in a sense it is unjust (for legal justice
and primordial justice are different); but if with knowledge he judged
unjustly, he is himself aiming at an excessive share either of gratitude
or of revenge. As much, then, as if he were to share in the plunder,
the man who has judged unjustly for these reasons has got too much;
the fact that what he gets is different from what he distributes makes
no difference, for even if he awards land with a view to sharing in
the plunder he gets not land but money. 

Men think that acting unjustly is in their power, and therefore that
being just is easy. But it is not; to lie with one's neighbour's wife,
to wound another, to deliver a bribe, is easy and in our power, but
to do these things as a result of a certain state of character is
neither easy nor in our power. Similarly to know what is just and
what is unjust requires, men think, no great wisdom, because it is
not hard to understand the matters dealt with by the laws (though
these are not the things that are just, except incidentally); but
how actions must be done and distributions effected in order to be
just, to know this is a greater achievement than knowing what is good
for the health; though even there, while it is easy to know that honey,
wine, hellebore, cautery, and the use of the knife are so, to know
how, to whom, and when these should be applied with a view to producing
health, is no less an achievement than that of being a physician.
Again, for this very reason men think that acting unjustly is characteristic
of the just man no less than of the unjust, because he would be not
less but even more capable of doing each of these unjust acts; for
he could lie with a woman or wound a neighbour; and the brave man
could throw away his shield and turn to flight in this direction or
in that. But to play the coward or to act unjustly consists not in
doing these things, except incidentally, but in doing them as the
result of a certain state of character, just as to practise medicine
and healing consists not in applying or not applying the knife, in
using or not using medicines, but in doing so in a certain way.

Just acts occur between people who participate in things good in themselves
and can have too much or too little of them; for some beings (e.g.
presumably the gods) cannot have too much of them, and to others,
those who are incurably bad, not even the smallest share in them is
beneficial but all such goods are harmful, while to others they are
beneficial up to a point; therefore justice is essentially something
human. 

10 
Our next subject is equity and the equitable (to epiekes), and their
respective relations to justice and the just. For on examination they
appear to be neither absolutely the same nor generically different;
and while we sometime praise what is equitable and the equitable man
(so that we apply the name by way of praise even to instances of the
other virtues, instead of 'good' meaning by epieikestebon that a thing
is better), at other times, when we reason it out, it seems strange
if the equitable, being something different from the just, is yet
praiseworthy; for either the just or the equitable is not good, if
they are different; or, if both are good, they are the same.

These, then, are pretty much the considerations that give rise to
the problem about the equitable; they are all in a sense correct and
not opposed to one another; for the equitable, though it is better
than one kind of justice, yet is just, and it is not as being a different
class of thing that it is better than the just. The same thing, then,
is just and equitable, and while both are good the equitable is superior.
What creates the problem is that the equitable is just, but not the
legally just but a correction of legal justice. The reason is that
all law is universal but about some things it is not possible to make
a universal statement which shall be correct. In those cases, then,
in which it is necessary to speak universally, but not possible to
do so correctly, the law takes the usual case, though it is not ignorant
of the possibility of error. And it is none the less correct; for
the error is in the law nor in the legislator but in the nature of
the thing, since the matter of practical affairs is of this kind from
the start. When the law speaks universally, then, and a case arises
on it which is not covered by the universal statement, then it is
right, where the legislator fails us and has erred by oversimplicity,
to correct the omission-to say what the legislator himself would have
said had he been present, and would have put into his law if he had
known. Hence the equitable is just, and better than one kind of justice-not
better than absolute justice but better than the error that arises
from the absoluteness of the statement. And this is the nature of
the equitable, a correction of law where it is defective owing to
its universality. In fact this is the reason why all things are not
determined by law, that about some things it is impossible to lay
down a law, so that a decree is needed. For when the thing is indefinite
the rule also is indefinite, like the leaden rule used in making the
Lesbian moulding; the rule adapts itself to the shape of the stone
and is not rigid, and so too the decree is adapted to the facts.

It is plain, then, what the equitable is, and that it is just and
is better than one kind of justice. It is evident also from this who
the equitable man is; the man who chooses and does such acts, and
is no stickler for his rights in a bad sense but tends to take less
than his share though he has the law oft his side, is equitable, and
this state of character is equity, which is a sort of justice and
not a different state of character. 

11
