---
obra_pt: "Sobre as Partes dos Animais"
obra_en: "On the Parts of Animals"
categoria: 03_psicologia_biologia
obra_slug: 04_partes_animais
fonte: MIT/Oxford-Ogle
livro_num: 3
livro_marker: "BOOK III"
total_livros: 4
capitulo_num: 4
capitulo_marker: "Part 4"
total_capitulos_no_livro: 15
bytes: 14062
chars_aprox: 14062
---

We have now dealt with the neck, the oesophagus, and the windpipe,
and have next to treat of the viscera. These are peculiar to sanguineous
animals, some of which have all of them, others only a part, while
no bloodless animals have any at all. Democritus then seems to have
been mistaken in the notion he formed of the viscera, if, that is
to say, he fancied that the reason why none were discoverable in bloodless
animals was that these animals were too small to allow them to be
seen. For, in sanguineous animals, both heart and liver are visible
enough when the body is only just formed, and while it is still extremely
small. For these parts are to be seen in the egg sometimes as early
as the third day, being then no bigger than a point; and are visible
also in aborted embryos, while still excessively minute. Moreover,
as the external organs are not precisely alike in all animals, but
each creature is provided with such as are suited to its special mode
of life and motion, so is it with the internal parts, these also differing
in different animals. Viscera, then, are peculiar to sanguineous animals;
and therefore are each and all formed from sanguineous material, as
is plainly to be seen in the new-born young of these animals. For
in such the viscera are more sanguineous, and of greater bulk in proportion
to the body, than at any later period of life, it being in the earliest
stage of formation that the nature of the material and its abundance
are most conspicuous. There is a heart, then, in all sanguineous animals,
and the reason for this has already been given. For that sanguineous
animals must necessarily have blood is self-evident. And, as the blood
is fluid, it is also a matter of necessity that there shall be a receptacle
for it; and it is apparently to meet this requirement that nature
has devised the blood-vessels. These, again, must necessarily have
one primary source. For it is preferable that there shall be one such,
when possible, rather than several. This primary source of the vessels
is the heart. For the vessels manifestly issue from it and do not
go through it. Moreover, being as it is homogeneous, it has the character
of a blood-vessel. Again its position is that of a primary or dominating
part. For nature, when no other more important purpose stands in her
way, places the more honourable part in the more honourable position;
and the heart lies about the centre of the body, but rather in its
upper than its lower half, and also more in front than behind. This
is most evident in the case of man, but even in other animals there
is a tendency in the heart to assume a similar position, in the centre
of the necessary part of the body, that is to say of the part which
terminates in the vent for excrement. For the limbs vary in position
in different animals, and are not to be counted with the parts which
are necessary for life. For life can be maintained even when they
are removed; while it is self-evident that the addition of them to
an animal is not destructive of it. 

There are some who say that the vessels commence in the head. In this
they are clearly mistaken. For in the first place, according to their
representation, there would be many sources for the vessels, and these
scattered; and secondly, these sources would be in a region that is
manifestly cold, as is shown by its intolerance of chill, whereas
the region of the heart is as manifestly hot. Again, as already said,
the vessels continue their course through the other viscera, but no
vessel spreads through the heart. From this it is quite evident that
the heart is a part of the vessels and their origin; and for this
it is well suited by its structure. For its central part consists
of a dense and hollow substance, and is moreover full of blood, as
though the vessels took thence their origin. It is hollow to serve
for the reception of the blood, while its wall is dense, that it may
serve to protect the source of heat. For here, and here alone in all
the viscera and indeed in all the body, there is blood without blood-vessels,
the blood elsewhere being always contained within vessels. Nor is
this but consistent with reason. For the blood is conveyed into the
vessels from the heart, but none passes into the heart from without.
For in itself it constitutes the origin and fountain, or primary receptacle,
of the blood. It is however, from dissections and from observations
on the process of development that the truth of these statements receives
its clearest demonstration. For the heart is the first of all the
parts to be formed; and no sooner is it formed than it contains blood.
Moreover, the motions of pain and pleasure, and generally of all sensation,
plainly have their source in the heart, and find in it their ultimate
termination. This, indeed, reason would lead us to expect. For the
source must, when. ever possible, be one; and, of all places, the
best suited for a source is the centre. For the centre is one, and
is equally or almost equally within reach of every part. Again, as
neither the blood itself, nor yet any part which is bloodless, is
endowed with sensation, it is plain that that part which first has
blood, and which holds it as it were in a receptacle, must be the
primary source of sensation. And that this part is the heart is not
only a rational inference, but also evident to the senses. For no
sooner is the embryo formed, than its heart is seen in motion as though
it were a living creature, and this before any of the other parts,
it being, as thus shown, the starting-point of their nature in all
animals that have blood. A further evidence of the truth of what has
been stated is the fact that no sanguineous animal is without a heart.
For the primary source of blood must of necessity be present in them
all. It is true that sanguineous animals not only have a heart but
also invariably have a liver. But no one could ever deem the liver
to be the primary organ either of the whole body or of the blood.
For the position in which it is placed is far from being that of a
primary or dominating part; and, moreover, in the most perfectly finished
animals there is another part, the spleen, which as it were counterbalances
it. Still further, the liver contains no spacious receptacle in its
substance, as does the heart; but its blood is in a vessel as in all
the other viscera. The vessel, moreover, extends through it, and no
vessel whatsoever originates in it; for it is from the heart that
all the vessels take their rise. Since then one or other of these
two parts must be the central source, and since it is not the liver
which is such, it follows of necessity that it is the heart which
is the source of the blood, as also the primary organ in other respects.
For the definitive characteristic of an animal is the possession of
sensation; and the first sensory part is that which first has blood;
that is to say is the heart, which is the source of blood and the
first of the parts to contain it. 

The apex of the heart is pointed and more solid than the rest of the
organ. It lies against the breast, and entirely in the anterior part
of the body, in order to prevent that region from getting chilled.
For in all animals there is comparatively little flesh over the breast,
whereas there is a more abundant covering of that substance on the
posterior surface, so that the heat has in the back a sufficient amount
of protection. In all animals but man the heart is placed in the centre
of the pectoral region; but in man it inclines a little towards the
left, so that it may counterbalance the chilliness of that side. For
the left side is colder in man, as compared with the right, than in
any other animal. It has been stated in an earlier treatise that even
in fishes the heart holds the same position as in other animals; and
the reason has been given why it appears not to do so. The apex of
the heart, it is true, is in them turned towards the head, but this
in fishes is the front aspect, for it is the direction in which their
motion occurs. 

The heart again is abundantly supplied with sinews, as might reasonably
be expected. For the motions of the body commence from the heart,
and are brought about by traction and relaxation. The heart therefore,
which, as already said,' as it were a living creature inside its possessor,
requires some such subservient and strengthening parts. 

In no animals does the heart contain a bone, certainly in none of
those that we have ourselves inspected, with the exception of the
horse and a certain kind of ox. In these exceptional cases the heart,
owing to its large bulk, is provided with a bone as a support; just
as the bones serve as supports for the body generally. 

In animals of great size the heart has three cavities; in smaller
animals it has two; and in all has at least one, for, as already stated,
there must be some place in the heart to serve as a receptacle for
the first blood; which, as has been mentioned more than once, is formed
in this organ. But inasmuch as the main blood-vessels are two in number,
namely the so-called great vessel and the aorta, each of which is
the origin of other vessels; inasmuch, moreover, as these two vessels
present differences, hereafter to be discussed, when compared with
each other, it is of advantage that they also shall themselves have
distinct origins. This advantage will be obtained if each side have
its own blood, and the blood of one side be kept separate from that
of the other. For this reason the heart, whenever it is possible,
has two receptacles. And this possibility exists in the case of large
animals, for in them the heart, as the body generally, is of large
size. Again it is still better that there shall be three cavities,
so that the middle and odd one may serve as a centre common to both
sides. But this requires the heart to be of greater magnitude, so
that it is only in the largest hearts that there are three cavities.

Of these three cavities it is the right that has the most abundant
and the hottest blood, and this explains why the limbs also on the
right side of the body are warmer than those on the left. The left
cavity has the least blood of all, and the coldest; while in the middle
cavity the blood, as regards quantity and heat, is intermediate to
the other two, being however of purer quality than either. For it
behoves the supreme part to be as tranquil as possible, and this tranquillity
can be ensured by the blood being pure, and of moderate amount and
warmth. 

In the heart of animals there is also a kind of joint-like division,
something like the sutures of the skull. This is not, however, attributable
to the heart being formed by the union of several parts into a compound
whole, but is rather, as already said, the result of a joint-like
division. These jointings are most distinct in animals of keen sensibility,
and less so in those that are of duller feeling, in swine for instance.
Different hearts differ also from each other in their sizes, and in
their degrees of firmness; and these differences somehow extend their
influence to the temperaments of the animals. For in animals of low
sensibility the heart is hard and dense in texture, while it is softer
in such as are endowed with keener feeling. So also when the heart
is of large size the animal is timorous, while it is more courageous
if the organ be smaller and of moderate bulk. For in the former the
bodily affection which results from terror already pre-exists; for
the bulk of the heart is out of all proportion to the animal's heat,
which being small is reduced to insignificance in the large space,
and thus the blood is made colder than it would otherwise be.

The heart is of large size in the hare, the deer, the mouse, the hyena,
the ass, the leopard, the marten, and in pretty nearly all other animals
that either are manifestly timorous, or betray their cowardice by
their spitefulness. 

What has been said of the heart as a whole is no less true of its
cavities and of the blood-vessels; these also if of large size being
cold. For just as a fire of equal size gives less heat in a large
room than in a small one, so also does the heat in a large cavity
or a large blood-vessel, that is in a large receptacle, have less
effect than in a small one. Moreover, all hot bodies are cooled by
motions external to themselves, and the more spacious the cavities
and vessels are, the greater the amount of spirit they contain, and
the more potent its action. Thus it is that no animal that has large
cavities in its heart, or large blood-vessels, is ever fat, the vessels
being indistinct and the cavities small in all or most fat animals.

The heart again is the only one of the viscera, and indeed the only
part of the body, that is unable to tolerate any serious affection.
This is but what might reasonably be expected. For, if the primary
or dominant part be diseased, there is nothing from which the other
parts which depend upon it can derive succour. A proof that the heart
is thus unable to tolerate any morbid affection is furnished by the
fact that in no sacrificial victim has it ever been seen to be affected
with those diseases that are observable in the other viscera. For
the kidneys are frequently found to be full of stones, and growths,
and small abscesses, as also are the liver, the lung, and more than
all the spleen. There are also many other morbid conditions which
are seen to occur in these parts, those which are least liable to
such being the portion of the lung which is close to the windpipe,
and the portion of the liver which lies about the junction with the
great blood-vessel. This again admits of a rational explanation. For
it is in these parts that the lung and liver are most closely in communion
with the heart. On the other hand, when animals die not by sacrifice
but from disease, and from affections such as are mentioned above,
they are found on dissection to have morbid affections of the heart.

Thus much of the heart, its nature, and the end and cause of its existence
in such animals as have it.
